Title: The Corpus Hermeticum (Thrice-Greatest Hermes)
Author/Attribution: Hermes Trismegistus (attributed)
Translator & Year: G.R.S. Mead, 1906
Source URL: https://archive.org/details/thrice-greatest-hermes-vol-1-2-3-grs-mead (Vol 1); https://archive.org/details/GRSMeadThriceGreatestHermesVolII (Vol 2); https://archive.org/details/GRSMeadThriceGreatestHermesVolIII (Vol 3)
License/PD Basis: Published 1906, US PD by age
Date Retrieved: 2026-06-15
---


========================================
VOLUME I — PROLEGOMENA
========================================

V 89GE8Z700 1941 ¢ 


I 


OLNOHOL 4O ALISHSAIND 


Digitized by Microsoft ® 


Digitized for Microsoft Corporation 
by the Internet Archive in 2007. 
From University of Toronto. 
May be used for non-commercial, personal, research, 
or educational purposes, or any fair use. 
May not be indexed in a commercial service. 


Digitized by Microsoft ® 


Digitized by Microsoft ® 


Thrice-Greatest Hermes 


Vee 
TSA a 


fs 


Thrice-Greatest Hermes 


Studies in Hellenistic Theosophy 
and Gnosis 


Being a Translation of the Extant Sermons and 
Fragments of the Trismegistic Literature, with 
Prolegomena, Commentaries, and Notes 


By 


G. R. S. Mead 


Volume I.—Prolegomena 


London and Benares 


The Theosophical Publishing Society 


1906 


PL ea 
1) 3 Fe 


j A. 


1 


Preface 


THESE volumes, complete in themselves as a series of 
studies in a definite body of tradition, are intended to 
serve ultimately as a small contribution to the prepara- 
tion of the way leading towards a solution of the vast 
problems involved in the scientific study of the Origins 
of the Christian Faith. They might thus perhaps be 
described as the preparation of materials to serve for 
the historic, mythic, and mystic consideration of the 
Origins of Christianity,—where the term “ mythic” is 
used in its true sense of inner, typical, sacred and 
“logic,” as opposed to the external processioning of 
physical events known as “historic,” and where the 
term “mystic” is used as that which pertains to 
initiation and the mysteries. 

The serious consideration of the matter contained in 
these pages will, I hope, enable the attentive reader to 
outline in his mind, however vaguely, some small 
portion of the environment of infant Christianity, and 
allow him to move a few steps round the cradle of 
Christendom. 

‘ Though the material that we have collected, has, as 
to its externals, been tested, as far as our hands are 
capable of the work, by the methods of scholarship and 
criticism, it has nevertheless at the same time been 
allowed ungrudgingly to show itself the outward 


v 


vl PREFACE 


expression of a truly vital endeavour of immense 
interest and value to all who are disposed to make 
friends with it. For along this ray of the Trismegistic 
tradition we may allow ourselves to be drawn back- 
wards in time towards the holy of holies of’ the 
Wisdom of Ancient Egypt. The sympathetic study 
of this material may well prove an initiatory process 
towards an understanding of that Archaic Gnosis. 

And, therefore, though these volumes are intended to 
show those competent to judge that all has been set 
forth in decency according to approved methods of 
modern research, they are also designed for those who 
are not qualified to give an opinion on such matters, 
but who are able to feel and think with the writers of 
these beautiful tractates. 

The following abbreviations have been used for 
economy of space: 


C. H.=Corpus Hermeticum. 

D, J. L.=Mead (G. R.8.), Did Jesus Live 100 3.c.? An Enquiry 
into the Talmud Jesus Stories, the Toldoth Jeschu, and 
Some Curious Statements of Epiphanius: being a Contri- 
bution to the Study of Christian Origins (London, 1903). 

F. F. F.=Mead (G. BR. 8.), Fragments of a Faith Forgotten. Some 
Short Sketches among the Gnostics, mainly of the First 
Two Centuries: a Contribution to the Study of Christian 
Origins based on the most recently recovered Materials 
(London, 1900 ; 2nd ed. 1906). 

G.=Gaisford (T.), Joannis Stobet Florilegiwm (Oxford, 1822), 4 
vols. ; Io. Stob. Ee. Phys. et Ethic. Inbri Duo (Oxford, 
1850), 2 vols. 

H.=Hense (0.), I. Stob. Anth. Lib. Lert (Berlin, 1894), 1 vol., 
incomplete. 

K, K.=“The Virgin of the World” (Képy Kéoyov). 

M.= Meineke (A.), Joh. Stob. Flor. (Leipzig, 1855, 1856), 3 vols. ; 
Joh. Stob. Ec. Phys. et Ethic. Lib. Duo (Leipzig, 1860), 2 vols. 

P.=Parthey (G.), Hermetis Trismegisti Poemander ad Fidem Codi- 
cum Manu Scriptorwm recognovit (Berlin, 1854). 

Pat.=Patrizzi (F.), Nova de Universis Philosophia (Venice, 1593). 

P. 8. A.=“ The Perfect Sermon, or Asclepius.” 


PREFACE Vii 


R.=Reitzenstein (R.), Poimandres : Studien zur griechisch-digyptrs- 
chen und friichristlichen Literatur (Leipzig, 1904). 

Ri. = Richter (M. C. E.), Philonis Judai Opera Omnia, in Bablio- 
theca Sacra Patrum Ecclesie Grecorum (Leipzig, 1828-1830), 
8 vols. 

S. I. H.=“ The Sermon of Isis to Horus.” 

W.=Wachsmuth (C.), Io. Stob. Anthologit Lib. Duo Priores . . . 
Ec. Phys. et Ethic. (Berlin, 1884), 2 vols. 

G. R.S. M. 


CHELSEA, 1906. 


Contents 


PREFACE 


I. Toe REMAINS OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 
Writer and Reader 
The Extant Trismegistic Literature 
The Original MS. of our Corpus 
Texts and Translations 


II. THe History or tHE EvoLutTion oF OPINION 
The Chief Points of Interrogation 
The Opinions of the Humanists 
The First Doubt. 
The Launching of the Theory of Plagiarism 
The Only Argument Adduced : 
The Theory of Hilgers ! 
The German Theory of Neoplatonic “ ‘ Syncretismus” 
The French Theory of Egyptian nie oy 
The Views of Ménard : 
English Encyclopzedism 
Chambers’ Opinion . 
German Encyclopedism 
A Recent Article by Granger p 
Reitzenstein and the Dawn of Right Views 
A Key to Egypt’s Wisdom . 
The Answers to our Questions 
FROISE 
Ill. TaorH THE MasTER or WISDOM 
Thoth-Tehuti ‘ 
Thoth according to Pietschmann 
The Three Grades of the Egyptian Mysteries 
Thoth according to Reitzenstein 
Thoth according to Budge 
ix 


x CONTENTS 


PAGE 
His Deific Titles : ; ; : : 53 
j His Symbols and Name : : ; ? 54 
The Shrine of Thoth : : ‘ : 56 
Thoth and his Company of Eight . : ; 57 
The “ House of the Net”. : : , 58 
Thoth the Logos ; : : : . 63 
The Words of Thoth . : ; : : 63 
Thoth and the Osirified ; ; : , 65 
Thoth the Measurer . ‘ : ; 66 
The Title “ Thrice-greatest ” : 66 
The Supremacy of Thoth . : ‘ , 67 
The Views of a Scholar-Mystic ; 68 
The Spiritual Nature of the Inner Tradition of 
Egyptian Wisdom : ‘ : 69 
| The Holy Land of Egypt and its Initiates . a 
| Thoth the Initiator . : : : 71 
| Some of the Doctrines of Initiation F F ‘ 73 
\ The Temples of Initiation . ‘ - 74 
i The Mystery of the Birth of Horus . , x 
| “The Book of the Master” . ; aus 
The Steps of the Path : ; ; : 79 
An Illuminative Study : , ; . 80 
IV. THe Porputar THeureic Hermes-CuLr IN THE 
GREEK Magic PapyRi . ‘ ‘ . 82-98 
The “ Religion of Hermes”. . 82 
i. An Invocation to Hermes as the Good Mind ; 84 
ii. An Invocation to Lord Hermes ‘ F 86 
iii, An Invocation to Lord Hermes ‘ . 87 
iv. An Invocation to Thoth as Logos __. 90 
v. An Invocation to Hermes as the iain Light 90 
vi. The Mystic Rite of the Flame . 93 
vii. A Prayer of Consecration ‘ . ; 97 
V. Tae Matn Source or THE TRisMEGIsTIC LITERA- 
TURE ACCORDING TO MANETHO HicH PRIEST 
or Eaypr : 99-127 
Hermes at the Beginning of the Hellenistic Period . 99 
Petosiris and Nechepso ; ; : ie) Oe 
Manetho the Beloved of Thoth ‘ . 102 


The Letter of Manetho to Ptolemy Philadelphus . 103 
The Importance of Manetho’s Statement in his 
“ Sothis ” : . ‘ - , AGS 


PAGE 
Is “Sothis” a Forgery ? ‘ ’ : OG 
The Arguments of sci Aeioiyaciaie refuted . | 108 
The Seriadic Land . : ; Cc ahe 
The Stele of Hermes 3 ‘ ; ee Se 
The Sons of Seth-Hermes . ‘ ‘ oe EES 
The Epithet “ Thrice-greatest ” , a | ee 
The Clue of Griffiths . : : 
The Earliest Trismegistic Literature ; : 
Philo Byblius ‘ . 122 
Are his “ Pheenician Histories "a Forgery ? . 123 
Sanchuniathon and the “ Books of Hermes ” . 124 
VI. An Eayprian PRoroTyPE OF THE MAIN FEATURES 
OF THE P@MANDRES’ CosMOGONY F 128-138 
The Higher Criticism of the “ Poemandres” 1. 8 
A Prototype of its Cosmogenesis .. . . 129 
A Praise-giving to Ptah ‘ : : | (aon 
Ptah-Thoth the Wise One . , ; . 132 
Egyptian Syncretism 1000 B.c. : - 13 
The Doctrine of “ Pcemandres ” Compared with that 
of its Prototype . ; ; , . 136 
The Man-Doctrine . ! ; . . 138 
Vil. Tae Myra or Man IN THE MYSTERIES. 139-198 
The Gnostic Tradition ; : cee 3) 
The “ Philosophumena ” of ‘Hippolytus ; . 140 
The Naassenes | ae 
Analysis of Hippolytus’ Account of the Naassene 
Document : - 3 ; . 142 
Hippolytus’ Introduction. 146 
The Material for the Recovery of the Original 
Hellenistic Document . ” . 148 
Hippolytus’ Conclusion ‘ y , Ue 
Conclusion of Analysis : ‘ y ‘a, aoe 
The Hellenist Commentator . ‘ ‘ . 393 
The Jewish and Christian Overwriters . . 194 
Zosimus and the Anthropos- Doctrine : . 196 
Philo of Alexandria on the Man-Doctrine . «|! ABT 
VIII. Patto or ALEXANDRIA AND THE HELLENISTIC 
THEOLOGY : ' 199-254 
Concerning Philo and his Method ; i - 199 


CONTENTS xi 


The Great Importance of his Writings x . 204 


Xi CONTENTS 


PAGE 


Concerning the Mysteries 205 
Concerning the Sacred Marriage 216 
Concerning the Logos 225 
The Son of God R 226 
The True High Priest ' 227 
The Elder and Younger Sons of God 229 
Yet God is One ‘ : 230 
The Logos is Life and Light . 231 
The Divine Vision . . 233 
The Sons of God on Earth 233 
The City of God 235 
God’s Shadow 4 . 236 
The Mother-City of Refuge . 237 
The True Shepherd . 238 
The Apostles of God . ‘ 239 
The Ladder of the “ Words” 239 
The Logos the Spiritual Sun 241 
The Disciples of the Logos 243 
The River of the Divine Reason 244 
Jerusalem Above 245 
The Logos is as Manna and Coriander Seed 246 
The Logos is the Pupil of God’s Eye 247 
“Man shall not Live by Bread Alone” 248 
The Logos-Mediator . é 249 
The Yoga of Plotinus 251 
The Race of God. 253 
IX. PrurarcH: CONCERNING THE MysTERIES oF Isis 
AND OSIRIS : ; ; : 255-368 
Foreword. : : : i 255 
Concerning Isis and Osiris . ; 261-366 
Address to Klea concerning Gnosis mad the Search 
for Truth ; 261 
The Art of Knowing and of Divinising 262 
The True Initiates of Isis 263 
Why the Priests are Shaven and wear Linen . 265 
Of the Refraining from Flesh and Salt and Super- 
fluities . é ' i . 267 
On the Drinking of Wine 268 
On Fish Taboos 3 ‘ 269 
The Onion and Pig Taboos . 271 
The Kings, the Riddles of the Priests and the 
Meaning of Amoun é ; . 273 


CONTENTS Xili 


PAGE 
Of the Greek Disciples of Egyptians and of Pytha- 

goras and his Symbols ‘ 274 
Advice to Klea concerning the Hidden Meaning o of 

the Myths ; : 276 
The Mystery-Myth . ‘ 278 
The Undermeaning, a Reflexion of a Certain Reason 291 
Concerning the Tombs of Osiris. ; . 292 
Concerning the Theory of Evemerus : - 295 
The Theory of the Daimones ‘ ‘ - 298 
Concerning Sarapis . . : ‘ - 301 
Concerning Typhon . R i ; . 304 
The Theory of the Physicists . / 2): SOF 
Concerning Osiris and Dionysus _. ‘ . 310 
The Theory of the Physicists Resumed ‘ . 312 
The Theory of the Mathematici . ‘ - 318 
The Theory of the Dualists . i . 328 
The Proper Reason according to Plutarch 4 - 333 
The Symbolism of the Sistrum : . 844 
The True “ Logos” again according to Plutarch . 3845 


Against the Weather and Vegetation God Theories 346 
Concerning the Worship of Animals and Totemism 353 


Concerning the Sacred Robes i ; . 861 
Concerning Incense . ‘ ‘ ; . 3863 
Afterword. ; ‘ , ‘ | 
X. “Hermas” AnD “HERMES” . . ; 369-386 
An Anticipation : 369 
The Higher Criticism of “ The Shepherd of Hermas” ”» 370 
The Introduction of the “ Pastoral Hermas” . 3870 
Comparison with our “ Pcemandres ” 371 
The Popular Symbolic. Representation of the Shepherd 372 
The Name “ Hermas” . 374 
An Early Form of the “ Posmandres” : . 874 
The Holy Mount... ; ‘ j . 375 
“Gnostic” Elements . : . . . 376 
The Vices and Virtues : , ~ eee 
The Early Date of the Original “ Hermas * . 378 
The Dependence Theory to be used with Caution . 379 
The Visions of Crates : 380 
The General Christian “Many” and the ‘Gnostic 
“Few” . : Z -. 382 
The Story of Abbot Olympins ‘ ; . 384 


A Final Word 7 j § > 385 


XIV CONTENTS 
PAGE 
XI. ConceRNING THE Mon-DocrRINE . : 387-412 
The Scope of our Essay ; 387 
The Orphic Tradition of the Genesis of the World- 

Egg 3 , : : : . 388 
Commentary . : : : : . 392 
The Sethian Gnosis . F : : . 393 
The Mithriac Hon . 399 
Probable Date of Origin of the Flelloniatie on- 

Doctrine . : ; ‘ + 401 
Abraxas : : : ’ . 402 
The Feast of the Eon ‘ ; ‘ . 403 
The Quintessence and the Monad_ . . . 403 
The on in Plato . . 404 
Concerning the Hellenistic Origin of Eonology . 405 
The Mon the Logos . . 406 
The Roman Seculum Cult derived from Bay pt . 407 
The Honic Immensities of Egypt . . 407 
A Song of Praise to the Hon ; : . 408 
The Demiurgic on . : ‘ » 410 
The Aon in Theurgic Titeratire : ‘ . 410 


XII. Tort SEVEN ZONES AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS 413-428 


XIII. 


XIV. 


Macrobius on “ The Descent of the Soul from the 


Heights of Cosmos to the Depths of Earth” . 413 
The Tradition of Servius : Z ’ . 418 
Criticism of the Evidence . . : . 419 
The “Ophite” Hebdomad . . 421 
The Simpler Form of the Trismegistic Gnosis - 423 
Concerning Leviathan and Behemoth : . 423 
The “ Fence of Fire” . : ; are: boyy 
Piato: CONCERNING METEMPSYCHOSIS . 429-436 
The Soul and her Mysteries in the “ Phedrus” . 429 
Plotinus on Metempsychosis . : 434 
Proclus on the Descent of Souls into Tredtions! 

Natures . F d : 2 . 485 
THE VISION OF ER . P ' 3 437-449 
Er Son of Armenius . : ; : i, (GST 
From the Mysteries . : ‘ i . 438 
The Cylinder . : ; : = . 439 
The Vision . A . ; : . 440 


Commentary . . ; : ‘ . 448 


CONTENTS xV 


PAGE 


XV. ConcERNING THE CRATER OR CUP . : 450-456 
The Crater in Plato . 4 - 450 
In “ Orpheus,” Macrobius, and Proclus i . 451 
The Vision of Aridzeus : 452 

The Origin of the 2 ce to be sought in  Orphie 
Tradition B 456 


XVI. Tue Discretes or Turice-Greatest Hermes 457-481 


Ptah, Sekhet and eerie vera tt ‘ . 457 
Nefer-Tem ; , . 458 
Imhotep-Imuth-Asclepius . . ? . 459 
Thath-Tat  . , . ‘ . 461 
The Incarnations of Thoth ‘ ; 463 
The Disciples of Lord Hermes in Petosiris and 
Nechepso : ; : 6 - 464 
Tosothros-Asclepius . - 465 
Imuth-Asclepius the Master-Mason and Poet - 466 
Aisenlapius the Healer é : - 467 
Asclepius in Trismegistic Tradition . : . 469 
Concerning Ammon . ; : : - 471 
Prophet and King . ; ; ; . 472 
Amenhotep-Asclepius ; 5 : aaa 
The Sacred Group of Four . : . 474 
James, John and Peter ; , ; . 475 
The Triad of Disciples q : ; . 476 
Chnum the Good Daimon . 477 
Osiris Disciple of Agathodaimon the Trice greatest — 478 
Logos-Mind the Good Daimon : . 478 
Chnum Good Mind the Hon ; 480 
Isis, Lady of ee par of ‘Thrice gents 
Hermes . 481 


Was he one or many, merging 
Name and fame in one, 

Like a stream, to which, converging, 
Many streamlets run ? 


Who shall call his dreams fallacious ? 
Who has searched or sought 

All the unexplored and spacious 
Universe of thought ? 


Who in his own skill confiding, 
Shall with rule and line 

Mark the border-land dividing 
Human and divine ? 


Trismegistus |! Three times greatest ! 
How thy name sublime 

Has descended to this latest 
Progeny of time! 


LonereLLow, Hermes Trismegistus.' 


1 This poem is dated January 1882. Chambers (p. 155, n.) says: 
‘It is noteworthy that the last poem of Longfellow was a lyrical ode in 
celebration of Hermes Trismegistus.” 


xvi 


Thrice-Greatest Hermes 


I 


THE REMAINS OF THE TRISMEGISTIC 
LITERATURE 


WRITER AND READER 


Littie did I think when, years ago, I began to translate 
some of the Trismegistic tractates, that the undertaking 
would finally grow into these volumes. My sole object 
then was to render the more important of these beautiful 
theosophic treatises into an English that might, perhaps, 
be thought in some small way worthy of the Greek 
originals. I was then more attracted by the sermons 
themselves than by the manifold problems to which they 
gave rise; I found greater pleasure in the spiritual 
atmosphere they created, than in the critical considera- 
tions which insistently imposed themselves upon my 
mind, as I strove to realise their importance for the 
history of the development of religious ideas in the 
Western world. ; 

And now, too, when I take pen in hand to grapple 
with the difficulties of “introduction” for those who 
will be good enough to follow my all-insufficient labours, 
it is to the tractates themselves that I turn again and 
again for refreshment in the task; and every time I 
turn to them I am persuaded that the best of them are 
worthy of all the labour a man can bestow ee them. 

VOL, 1. 


2 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Though it is true that the form of these volumes, 
with their Prolegomena and Commentaries and numer- 
ous notes, is that of a technical treatise, it has never- 
theless been my aim to make them throughout accessible 
to the general reader, even to the man of one language 
who, though no scholar himself, may yet be deeply 
interested in such studies. These volumes must, there- 
fore, naturally fall short of the precision enjoyed by 
the works of technical specialists which are filled with 
direct quotations from a number of ancient and modern 
tongues; on the other hand, they have the advantage 
of appealing to a larger public, while at the same time 
the specialist is given every indication for controlling 
the statements and translations, 

Nor should the general reader be deterred by an 
introductory volume under the imposing sub-title of 
Prolegomena, imagining that these chapters are neces- 
sarily of a dull, critical nature, for the subjects dealt 
with are of immense interest in themselves (at least 
they seem so to me), and are supplementary to the 
Trismegistic sermons, frequently adding material of a 
like nature to that in our tractates. 

Some of these Prolegomena have grown out of the 
Commentaries, for I found that occasionally subjects 
lent themselves to such lengthy digressions that they 
could be removed to the Prolegomena to the great 
advantage of the Commentary. The arrangement of 
the material thus accumulated, however, has proved a 
very difficult task, and I have been able to preserve 
but little logical sequence in the chapters; but this is 
owing mainly to the fact that the extant Trismegistic 
literature itself is preserved to us in a most chaotic 
fashion, and I as yet see no means of inducing any sure 
order into this chaos, 


REMAINS OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 3 


Tue EXTANT TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 


To distinguish our writings both from the Egyptian 
“Books of Thoth” and the Hermes Prayers of the 
popular Egyptian cult, as found in the Greek Magic 
Papyri, and also from the later Hermetic Alchemical 
literature, I have adopted the term Trismegistic litera- 
ture in place of the usual designation Hermetic. 

Of this Greek Trismegistic literature proper, much is 
lost; that which remains to us, of which I have en- 
deavoured to gather together every fragment and scrap, 
falls under five heads: 


A. The Corpus Hermeticum. 

B. The Perfect Sermon, or the Asclepius, 

C. Excerpts by Stobzeus. 

D. References and Fragments in the Fathers. 

E. References and Fragments in the Philosophers. 


A. The Corpus Hermeticum includes what has, pre- 
vious to Reitzenstein,? been known as the “ Poimandres” 2 
collection of fourteen Sermons and the “ Definitions of 
Asclepius.” 

B, The Perfect Sermon, or the Asclepius, is no longer 
extant in Greek, but only in an Old Latin version. 

C. There are twenty-seven Excerpts, from otherwise 
lost Sermons, by John Stobseus, a Pagan scholar of the 


1 Reitzenstein (R.), Poimandres: Studien zur griechisch- 
dgyptischen und friihchristlichen Literatur (Leipzig ; 1904). 

2 Variously translated, or metamorphosed, as Pcemandres, 
Pcemander, Poemandre, Pymandar, Pimander, Pimandre, Piman- 
dro. Already Patrizzi, in 1591, pointed out that only one treatise 
could be called by this title ; but, in spite of this, the bad habit 
inaugurated by the editio princeps (in Latin translation) of 
Marsiglio Ficino has persisted to the last edition of the text by 
Parthey (1854) and the last translation by Chambers (1882). 


4 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


end of the fifth or beginning of the sixth century, who 
was an immense reader and made a most valuable 
collection of extracts from Greek authors, though 
studiously avoiding every Christian writer. Some of 
these Excerpts are of great length, especially those 
from the Sermon entitled “The Virgin of the World” ; 
these twenty-seven Excerpts are exclusive of extracts 
from Sermons still preserved in our Corpus. 

D. From the Church Fathers we obtain many refer- 
ences and twenty-five short Fragments, otherwise 
unknown to us, and considerably widening our ac- 
quaintance with the scope of the literature. 

E. From Zosimus and Fulgentius we obtain three 
Fragments, and from the former and Iamblichus, and 
Julian the Emperor-Philosopher, we obtain a number 
of valuable references. 

Such are what at first sight may appear to be the 
comparatively scanty remains of what was once an 
exceedingly abundant literature. But when we re- 
member that this literature was largely reserved and 
kept secret, we cannot but congratulate ourselves that 
so much has been preserved ; indeed, as we shall see 
later on, but for the lucky chance of a Hermetic apolo- 
gist selecting some of the sermons to exemplify the 
loyal nature of the Trismegistic teaching with respect 
to kings and rulers, we should be without any Hermetic 
Corpus at all, and dependent solely on our extracts and 
fragments. 

But even with our Hermetic Corpus before us we 
should never forget that we have only a fraction of the 
Trismegistic literature—the flotsam and jetsam, so to 
say, of a once most noble vessel that sailed the seas of 
human endeavour, and was an ark of refuge to many a 
pious and cultured soul. 

References to lost writings of the School will meet 


REMAINS OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 5 


us abundantly in the course of our studies, and some 
attempt will be made later on to form a notion of the 
main types of the literature. 

As for the rest of the so-called Hermetic works, 
medico-mathematical, astrological and medico-astro- 
logical, and alchemical, and for a list of the many 
inventions attributed to the Thrice-greatest—inven- 
tions as numerous as, and almost identical with, those 
attributed to Orpheus by fond posterity along the 
line of “pure” Hellenic tradition—I would refer the 
student to the Bibliotheca Graca of Joannes Albertus 
Fabricius. 

For the Alchemical and Medizval literature the two 
magnificent works of Berthelot (M. P. E.) are indispens- 
able—namely, Collection des anciens <Alchimistes grecs 
(Paris, 1888), and La Chimie au Moyen Age (Paris, 
1893). 

In close connection with the development of this 
form of “Hermetic” tradition must be taken the 
Hermes writings and traditions among the Arabs. See 
Beausobre’s Histoire Critique de Manichée et du Mant- 
chéisme (Amsterdam, 1734), i. 326; also Fleischer (H. 
L.), Hermes Trismegistus an die menschliche Seele, Ara- 
bisch und Deutsch (Leipzig, 1870); Bardenhewer (0.), 
Hermetis Trismegisti gui apud Arabes fertur de Casti- 
gatione Anime Liber (Bonn, 1873); and especially R. 
Pietschmann, the pupil of Georg Ebers, who devotes 
the fourth part of his treatise, entitled Hermes T'risme- 
gistus nach dgyptischen wnd orientalischen Uberlieferungen 
(Leipzig, 1875), to a consideration of the Hermes 
tradition, “ Bei Syrern und Araben.,” 


1 Vol. i, lib. i, cap. vii. See the fourth and last edition 
(Leipzig, 1790), with up to that time unedited supplements by 
Fabricius and G. C. Heumann, and very numerous and im- 
portant additions by G. C. Harles. 


6 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES’ 


Reitzenstein treats very briefly of the development of 
this later Hermetic literature on pp. 188-200 of his 
Poimandres 


THE OricinaL MS. oF our Corpus 


From the fragmentary nature of the remains of the 
Trismegistic literature that have come down to us, it 
will be at once seen that a critical text of them isa 
complicated undertaking; for, apart from the Corpus, 
the texts have to be collected from the works of many 
authors, This, however, has never yet been done in 
any critical fashion ; so that a translator has first of all 
to find the best existing critical texts of these authors 
from which to make his version. This, I hope, I have 
succeeded in doing; but even so, numerous obscurities 
still remain in the texts of the excerpts, fragments, and 
quotations, and it is highly desirable that some scholar 
specially acquainted with our literature should collect 
all these together in one volume, and work over the 
labours of specialists on the texts of Stobeeus and the 
Fathers, with the added equipment of his own special 
knowledge. 

Even the text of our Corpus is still without a 
thoroughly critical edition ; for though Reitzenstein has 
done this work most admirably for C. H., i., xiii. (xiv.), 
and (xvi.)-(xviii.), basing himself on five MSS. and 
the printed texts of the earlier editions, he has not 
thought fit to give us a complete text. 

A list of the then known MSS. is given in Harles’ 
edition of Fabricius’ Bibliotheca Graea (pp. 51, 52); 
while Parthey gives notes on the only two MSS. he 
used in his edition of fourteen of the Sermons of 

1 For the Hermetic writing in Pitra, Analecta Sacra et Classica, 


pt. ii, see R., pp. 16, n. 4, and 259, n. 1; and for reference to the 
Arabic literature, pp. 23, n. 5, and 172, n. 3. 


REMAINS OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 7 


our Corpus. It is, however, generally believed that 
there may be other MSS. hidden away in Continental 
libraries. 

All prior work on the MSS., however, is entirely 
superseded by Reitzenstein in his illuminating “ History 
of the Text” (pp. 319-327), in which we have the 
whole matter set forth with the thoroughness that 
characterises the best German scholarship. 

From him we learn that we owe the preservation of 
our Hermetic Corpus to a single MS. that was found 
in the eleventh century in a sad condition. Whole 
quires and single leaves were missing, both at the 
beginning (after ch. i.) and the end (after ch. xvi.); 
even in the remaining pages, especially in the last 
third, the writing was in a number of places no longer 
legible. 

In this condition the MS. came into the hands of 
Michael Psellus, the great reviver of Platonic studies at 
Byzantium, probably at the time when his orthodoxy 
was being called into question. Psellus thought he 
would put these writings into circulation again, but at 
the same time guard himself against the suspicion that 
their contents corresponded with his own conclusions. 
This accounts for the peculiar scholion to C. H., i. 18, 
which seems at first pure monkish denunciation of 
Poemandres as the Devil in disguise to lead men from 
the truth, while the conclusion of it betrays so deep 
an interest in the contents that it must have been 
more than purely philological. 

And that such an interest was aroused in the 
following centuries at Byzantium, may be concluded 
from the fact that the last three chapters, which directly 
justify polytheism or rather Heathendom, were omitted 
in a portion of the MSS., and only that part of the 
Corpus received a wider circulation which corresponded 


8 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


with what might be regarded at first sight as a 
Neoplatonism assimilated to Christianity. The text 
was reproduced with thoughtless exactitude, so that 
though its tradition is extraordinarily bad, it is uniform, 
and we can recover with certainty the copy of Psellus © 
from the texts of the fourteenth century. 

These Trismegistic Sermons obtained a larger field of 
operation with the growth of Humanism in the West. 
Georgius Gemistus Pletho, in the latter part of the 
fourteenth and beginning of the fifteenth century, 
brought Neoplatonism from Byzantium into Italy as a 
kind of religion and made a deep impression on Cosimo 
Medici; and Marsiglio Ficino, who was early selected by 
the latter as the head of the future Academy, must have 
made his Latin translation. of our Corpus, which 
appeared in 1463, to serve as the first groundwork of 
this undertaking. Cosimo had the Greek text brought 
from Bulgaria (Macedonia) by a monk, Fra Lionardo 
of Pistoja, and it is still in the Medicean Library. 

It was not, however, till the middle of the sixteenth 
century that the Greek text was printed; and meantime, 
with the great interest taken in these writings by the 
Humanists, a large number of MSS. arose which sought 
to make the text more understandable or more elegant ; 
such MSS. are of no value for the tradition of the 
text. 


TEXTS AND TRANSLATIONS 


We will now proceed to give some account of the 
texts and translations of the Trismegistic writings, a 
bibliographical labour which the general reader will 
most probably skip, but which the real student will 
appreciate at its proper value,* 

1 This study was published in the Theosophical Review, May 
1899, and is independent of Reitzenstein’s work. 


REMAINS OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 9 


The best account of the texts and translations up to 
1790 is that of Harles, who has entirely rewritten 
the account of Fabricius (op. ecit., pp. 52 ff.).2 

The editio princeps was not a text but a Latin trans- 
lation by Marsiglio Ficino (Marsilius Ficinus), published 
in quarto in 1471.2 Both the name of the publisher 
and place of publication are lacking, but the British 
Museum catalogue inserts them in parenthesis as “G. 
de Lisa, Treviso,’ presumably on the authority of 
Harles. This translation consisted of the so-called 
“ Poemandres,” in fourteen chapters, that is to say 
fourteen treatises, under the general title, Mercuri 
Trismegisti Liber de Potestate et Sapientia Dei (or The 
Book of Mercury Trismegist concerning the Power and 
Wisdom of God). The enormous popularity of this 
work is seen by the fact of the very numerous editions 
(for a book of that time) through which it ran. No 
less than twenty-two editions have appeared, the first 
eight of them in the short space of a quarter of a 
century.’ 

In 1548 there appeared an Italian translation of 
Ficinus’ Latin version of the “ Poemandres” collection, 
entitled J7 Pimandro di Mercurio Trismegisto, done into 
Florentine by Tommaso Benci, printed at Florence in 
12mo. A second edition was printed at Florence in 
1549 in 8vo, with numerous improvements by Paitoni. 

1S. F. W. Hoffmann’s Bibliographisches Lecicon der gesammten 
Litteratur der Griechen (2nd ed., Leipzig, 1839) simply copies 
Harles, while his appendix of “Erliuterungsschriften” is of no 
value, 

2 R. (p. 320), as we have seen, gives the date as 1463, but I 
have found no trace of this edition. 

3 The dates of these editions are as follows, though doubtless 
there were other editions of which we have lost record: 1471, ’72, 
81, ’83, 91, ’93, 94, 97 ; 1503, °05, "16, 22, °32, ’49, °52, 54, ’61, 
"70, 76, "77; 1611, ’41. They were printed at Venice, Paris, 
Basle, Lyons, and London. 


10 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


The first Greek text was printed at Paris, in 1554, 
by Adr. Turnebus; it included the “ Poemandres” and 
“The Definitions of Asclepius,” to which the Latin 
version of Ficino was appended. The title is, Mercwru 
Trismegisti Pemander seu de Potestate ac Sapientia 
Divina: Aesculapii Definitiones ad Ammonem Regem ; 
the Greek was edited by P. Angelo da Barga (Angelus 
Vergecius). 

In 1557 appeared the first French translation by 
Gabriel du Preau, at Paris, with a lengthy title, 
Deux Livres de Mercure Trismegiste Hermés tres ancien 
Theologien, et excellant Philozophe. L’un de la pwissance 
et sapience de Diew. L'autre de la volonte de Dieu. 
Auecg’un Dialogue de Loys Lazarel, poéte Chrestien, 
intitulé le Bassin d’ Hermés. 

This seems to be simply a translation of an edition 
of Ficinus’ Latin version published at Paris by Henr. 
Stephanus in 1505, to which a certain worthy, Loys 
Lazarel, who further rejoiced in the agnomen of 
Septempedanus, appended a lucubration of his own of 
absolutely no value,! for the title of Estienne’s edition 
runs: Pimander Mercurti Liber de Sapientia et Potestate 
Dei. Asclepius, ejusdem Mercurvi Lnber de Voluntate 
Divina, Siem Crater Hermetis a Lazarelo Septempedano. 

In 1574 Franciscus Flussas Candalle reprinted at 
Bourdeaux, in 4to, Turnebus’ Greek text, which he 
emended, with the help of the younger Scaliger and 
other Humanists, together with a Latin translation, 
under the title, Mercurii Trismegisti Pimander sive 
Pemander. This text is still of critical service to-day. 

This he followed with a French translation, printed 
in 1579, also at Bourdeaux in folio, and bearing the 
title, Le Pimandre de Mercure Trismegiste de la Philo- 


1 The writer has painfully perused it, for, more fortunate than 
the British Museum, he possesses a copy of this rare work. 


REMAINS OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 11 


sophie Chrestienne, Cognoissance du Verb Divin, et de 
Excellence des Giuwvres de Dieu. This we are assured 
is translated “de l’exemplaire Grec, avec collation de 
trés-amples commentaires,” all of which is followed by 
the full name and titles of Flussas, to wit, “ Francois 
Monsieur de Foix, de la famille de Candalle, Captal 
de Buchs, etc., Evesque d’Ayre, etc.,” the whole being 
dedicated to “ Marguerite de France, Roine de Navarre.” 

Twelve years later Franciscus Patricius (Cardinal 
Francesco Patrizzi) printed an edition of the text of 
the Sermons of the Corpus, of “The Asclepius,” and 
also of most of the Extracts and of some of the Frag- 
ments ; he, however, has arranged them all in a quite 
arbitrary fashion, and has as arbitrarily altered the 
text, which generally followed that of Turnebus and 
Candalle, in innumerable places. To this he appended 
a Latin translation, in which he emended the versions 
of Ficino and de Foix, as he tells us, in no less than 
1040 places. These were included in his Nova de 
Universis Philosophia, printed at Ferrara, in folio, 
1591, and again at Venice by R. Meiettus, in 1593, as 
an appendix to his Nov. de Un. Phil., now increased to 
fifty books. 

This Latin translation of Patrizzi was printed apart, 
together with the Chaldwan Oracles, at Hamburg in 
12mo, also, in 1593, under the title Magia Philosophica, 
The latter edition bears. the subscription on the title- 
page, “jam nune primum ex Biblioteca Ranzoviana 2 
tenebris eruta,’ which Harles explains as a reprint 
by plain Henr. Ranzou, who is, however, described in 
the volume itself as “produx.” It seems to have 
been again reprinted at Hamburg in 1594 in 8vo. 

Meantime the Carmelite, Hannibal Rossellus, had 


1 These on perusal prove of little value. 
2 R. 322 calls him a Minorite. 


12 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


been laboriously engaged for many years on an edition 
of the “Poemandres” with most elaborate commen- 
taries. This was printed at Cracow by Lazarus, in six 
volumes in folio, from 1585 to 1590. Rossel treats 
of philosophy, theology, the Pope, the scriptures, and 
all disciplines in his wmmanibus commentariis, inepte as 
some say, while others bestow on him great praise. 
His title is Pymander Mercurit Trismegisti. This was 
reprinted with the text and translation of de Foix in 
folio at Cologne in 1630, under the title Divinus 
Pimander Hermetis Mercurw Trismegistt. 

Hitherto nothing had been done in England, but in 
1611 an edition of Ficinus’ translation was printed in 
London. This was followed by what purports to be 
a translation of the “ Poemandres” from Arabic,! “ by 
that learned Divine, Doctor Everard,” as the title-page 
sets forth. It was printed in London in 1650 in 8vo, 
with a preface by “J. F.,” and bears the title The 
Divine Pymander of Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus, in 
wv. Books, Translated formerly out of the Arabick into 
Greek [!] and thence into Latin, and Dutch, and now 
out of the Original into English. There was a second 
edition of Everard’s version printed at London in 1657, 
in 12mo, There are also reprints of the 1650 edition 
by Fryar of Bath, with an introduction by Hargrave 
Jennings, in 1884;2 by P. B. Randolph, Toledo, Ohio, 
1889; and by the Theosophical Publishing Society, in 
the Collectanea Hermetica, edited by W. Wynn Westcott, 
in 1893. 

To what Dutch translation Everard refers I cannot 
discover, for the only one known to me is that printed 


1 It is clear, however, that Everard translated from Ficinus’ 
Latin version, and that the “ Arabick” is a myth. 

2 Of which only 200 copies were issued to subscribers, as though, 
forsooth, they were to come into great “occult” secrets thereby. 


REMAINS OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 13 


at Amsterdam in 1652in 12mo. It is a translation of 
Patrizzi’s text, and bears the title, Sestien Boecken van 
den Hermes Trismegistus. . . . wyt het Griecu ghebracht 

. . met cone .. . Voorede wyt het Latin von F. 
Patricius in de welcke hy bewiyst dat desen ... 
Philosoph heeft gebleoyt voor Moyses, etc. Harles says 
nothing of this edition, but speaks of one printed at 
Amsterdam in 1643 in 4to, by Nicholas van Rauenstein, 
but I can find no other trace of it. 

The first German translation was by a certain Aletho- 
philus, and was printed at Hamburg in 1706 (8vo) under 
the title Hermetis Trismegisti Erkdntniiss der Natur, 
etc., containing seventeen pieces; this was reprinted at 
Stuttgart in 1855, in a curious collection by J. Schieble, 
entitled Kleiner Wunder-Schauplatz+ The title reads 
Hermetis Trismegisti Einleitung in’s hichste Wissen von 
Erkentniss der Natur wnd der darin sich offenbarenden 

-grossen Gottes, with an appendix concerning the person 
of Hermes, ete. 

But why Schieble should have reprinted Aletho- 
philus’ translation is not clear, when in 1781 a new 
translation into German, with critical notes and 
valuable suggestions for emending the text, had 
appeared by Dieterich Tiedemann (Berlin and Stettin, 
in 8vo), entitled Hermes Trismegists Paemander, oder 
von der gdttlichen Macht und Weisheit, a rare book 
which, already in 1827, Baumgarten-Crusius? laments 


1 Part of the full title runs: K. W.-S. d. Wissenschaften, 
Mysterien, Theosophie, géttlichen und morgenlindischen Magie, 
Naturkrifte, hermet. wu. magnet. Phil., Kabbala, u. and. hihern 
Kentnissen, and much more in the same strain, but I have no 
doubt the reader has already had enough of it. From 1855 to 
1857 fourteen parts appeared, mostly taken up with German 
translations of Hermes, of Agrippa’s Philosophia Occulta from the 
Latin, and of The Telescope of Zoroaster from the French. 

2 Op. inf. cit., p. 10. 


14 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


as almost unfindable in the republic of letters, and 
of which the British Museum possesses no copy. 

It is remarkable that of a work which exhausted 
so many editions in translation and was evidently 
received with such great enthusiasm, there have been 
so few editions of the text, and that for two centuries 
and a quarter? no attempt was made to collate the 
different MSS. and editions, until in 1854 Gustav 
Parthey printed a critical text of the fourteen pieces 
of “ Poemandres,” at Berlin, under the title Hermetis 
Trismegisti Pemander, to which he appended a Latin 
translation based on the original version of Ficino 
successively revised by de Foix and Patrizzi. Parthey’s 
promise to edit religua Hermetis scripta has not been 
fulfilled, and no one else has so far attempted this 
most necessary task. 

Reitzenstein’s (p. 322) opinion of Parthey’s text, 
however, is very unfavourable. In the first place, 
Parthey took Patrizzi’s arbitrary alterations as a 
true tradition of the text; in the second, he himself 
saw neither of the MSS. on which he says he relies, 
The first of these was very carelessly copied for him 
and carelessly used by him; while the second, which 
was copied by D. Hamm, is very corrupt owing to very 
numerous “corrections” and interpolations by a later 
hand—all of which Parthey has adopted as ancient 
readings. His text, therefore, concludes Reitzenstein, 
is doubly falsified—a very discouraging judgment for 
lovers of accuracy. 

In 1866 there appeared at Paris, in 8vo, a complete 
translation in French of the Trismegistic treatises and 


1 I have, therefore, not been able to avail myself of Tiede- 
mann’s labours. R. 322 speaks highly of them. 

2 The last edition prior to Parthey’s was the reprint of Flussas’ 
text, at Cologne in 1630, appended to Rossel’s lucubrations. 


REMAINS OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 15 


fragments by Louis Ménard, entitled Hermés Trismégiste, 
preceded by an interesting study on the origin of the 
Hermetic books, of which a second edition was printed 
in 1867. This is beyond question the most sympathetic 
version that we at present possess. 

Everard’s version of the “ Pomandres” being re- 
printed in 1884 by Fryar of Bath, the rest of the 
treatises were retranslated by Anna Kingsford and 
Edward Maitland from Ménard’s French version 
(including his notes), and appeared in 1885 (in 4to), 
published by Fryar, but bearing a publisher’s name 
in India, under the general title The Hermetic Works: 
The Virgin of the World of Hermes Mercurius Trisme- 
gistus. Meantime, in 1882, J. D. Chambers had pub 
lished (at Edinburgh, in 8vo) a crabbed and slavishly 
literal translation of the “Poemandres,” together with 
_ the Excerpts from Stobeus and the Notices of Hermes 
in the Fathers, with an introductory Preface, under 
the title, The Theological and Philosophical Works of 
Hermes Trismegistus, Christian Neoplatonist. Indeed, 
the loose and erroneous version of Everard is far more 
comprehensible than this fantastically literal translation. 

For the last six years I have myself been publishing, 
in the pages of The Theosophical Review, translations of 
the Trismegistic Sermons and also a few of the studies 
now included in these Prolegomena; all of the 
former, however, have been now carefully revised, 
and the latter have for the most part been greatly 
enlarged and improved. 

Finally, in 1904, R. Reitzenstein of Strassburg 
published at Leipzig his illuminating study, Poimandres, 
in which he gives the critical text of (. H., i, xiii. (xiv.), 
(xvi.)-(xviii.), based on five MSS. and the best early 
printed editions, with all that minute care, knowledge 
of paleography, and enthusiasm for philology which 


16 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


characterises the best textual-critical work of modern 
scholarship. Why, however, Reitzenstein has not done 
the same good service for the whole of the Corpus as he 
has done for the selected sermons, is a mystery. He 
is the very man for the task, and the service he could 
render would be highly appreciated by many. 

So much, then, for the existing partial texts and 
translations of the extant Trismegistic literature. Of 
the translations with which I am acquainted, Everard’s 
(1650), the favourite in England, because of its 
dignified English, is full of errors, mistranslations, and 
obscurities ; it is hopeless to try to understand “ Hermes ” 
from this version. Chambers’s translation (1882, 
from the text of Parthey) is so slavishly literal that 
it ceases to be English in many places, in others goes 
wide of the sense, and, in general, is exasperating. 
Ménard’s French translation (1866, also from Parthey’s 
text) is elegant and sympathetic, but very free in many 
places; in fact, not infrequently quite emancipated from 
the text. The most literally accurate translation is 
Parthey’s Latin version (based on the Latin translation 
of Ficino, as emended by Candalle and Patrizzi); but 
even in such literal rendering he is at fault at times, 
while in general no one can fully understand the Latin 
without the Greek. To translate “ Hermes” requires 
not only a good knowledge of Greek, but also a know- 
ledge of that Gnosis which he has not infrequently so 
admirably handed on to us. 


1 As already remarked, I have not been able to see a coPY of 
the German of Tiedemann, 


IT 


THE HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF 
OPINION 


THe Cuter Pornts or INTERROGATION 


WE have now to consider the following interesting 
points : 

The early Church Fathers in general accepted the 
Trismegistic writings as exceedingly ancient and autho- 
ritative, and in their apologetic writings quote them in 
support of the main general positions of Christianity. 

In the revival of learning, for upwards of a century 
and a half, all the Humanists welcomed them with 
open arms as a most valuable adjunct to Christianity, 
and as being in accord with its doctrines; so much so 
that they laboured to substitute Trismegistus for 
Aristotle in the schools, 

During the last two centuries and a half, however, 
a body of opinion was gradually evolved, infinitesimal 
in its beginnings but finally well-nigh shutting out 
every other view, that these writings were Neoplatonic 
forgeries and plagiarisms of Christianity. 

Finally, with the dawn of the twentieth century, the 
subject has been rescued from the hands of opinion, 
and has begun to be established on the firm ground of 
historical and critical research, opening up problems 
of the greatest interest and importance for the history 
of Christian origins and their connection with Hellen- 

VOL, I, 17 2 


18 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


istic theology and theosophy, and throwing a brilliant 
light on the development of Gnosticism. 

The first point will be brought out in detail in the 
volume in which a translation of all the passages and 
references to Thrice-greatest Hermes in the writings 
of the Church Fathers will be given; while the last 
will be made abundantly apparent, we hope, in the 
general course of our studies, The second and third 
points will now demand our immediate attention, 
especially the third, for we have endeavoured with 
great labour to become acquainted with all the 
“arguments” which have tended to build up this 
opinion; and unless we have to change all our ideas 
as to the time-frame of so-called Neoplatonism, we are 
entirely unconvinced; for we find that it has been 
evolved from unsupported assertions, and that not one 
single work exists which ventures in any satisfactory 
fashion to argue the question (most writers merely 
reasserting or echoing prior opinions), or in which the 
statements made may not as easily prove the priority 
of the Trismegistic school to the Neoplatonic as the 
reverse. 

We will then proceed to give some account of this 
chaos of contradictory opinions, picking out the most 
salient points. 


THE OPINIONS OF THE HUMANISTS 


That the early scholars of the revival of learning 
were all unanimously delighted with the Trismegistic 
writings, is manifest from the bibliography we have 
already given, and that they should follow the judgment 
of the ancient Fathers in the matter is but natural to 
expect; for them not only were the books prior to 
Christianity, but they were ever assured that Hermes 


— 


HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION 19 


had been a really existent personality, like any of the 
Biblical worthies, such as Enoch and Noah (as was 
unquestionably believed in those days), and further, 
that he was prior to, or a contemporary of, Moses.? 

Thus in the editio princeps of Ficino we read: “ Who- 
ever thou art who readest these things, whether 
grammarian, or rhetorician, or philosopher, or theo- 
logian, know thou that I am Hermes the Thrice-greatest, 
at whom wondered first the Egyptians and the other 
nations, and subsequently the ancient Christian theo- 
logians, in utter stupefaction at my doctrine rare of 
things divine.” 

The opinion of Ficino, that the “writer” of the 
“Poemandres” tractates was one who had a knowledge 
both of Egyptian and Greek, is of interest as being 
that of a man uncontaminated by the infinite doubts 
with which the atmosphere of modern criticism is filled, 
and thus able to get a clean contact with his subject. 

Of the same mind were Loys Lazarel and du Preau, 
the first French translator; while the Italian Cardinal 
Patrizzi appends to his labours the following beautiful 
words (attributed by some to Chalcidius?), which he 
puts in the mouth of Hermes: 

“Till now, my son, I, banished from my home, have 
lived expatriate in exile. Now safe and sound I seek 
my home once more. And when but yet a little while 
I shall have left thee, freed from these bonds of body, 
see that thou dost not mourn me as one dead. For I 
return to that supreme and happy state to which the 
universe’s citizens will come when in the after-state. 


1 For a list of those who thought Hermes was prior to Moses, 
and even identical with Joseph, or even Adam, see Harles, p. 49 
ff, and notes. 

2, A Platonic philosopher who lived probably in the 4th 
century A.D. 


20 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


For there the Only God is supreme lord, and He will 
fill His citizens with wondrous joy, compared to which 
the state down here which is regarded by the multitude 
as life, should rather be called death.” ! 

Patrizzi believed that Hermes was contemporary 
with Moses, basing himself upon the opinion of Eusebius 
in his Chronicwm, and thought that it would be to the 
greatest advantage of the Christian world, if such 
admirable and pious philosophy as was contained in 
the Trismegistic writings were substituted in the public 
schools for Aristotle, whom he regarded as overflowing 
with impiety. 


THE First Doust 


And that such opinions were the only ones as late as 
1630, is evident from the favour still shown to the 
voluminous commentaries of de Foix and Rossel. Never- 
theless some fifty years previously, a hardy pioneer of 
scepticism had sturdily attacked the validity of the 
then universal Hermes tradition on one point at least 
—and that a fundamental one. For Patrizzi (p. 1a) 
declares that a certain Jo. Goropius Becanus was the 
first after so many centuries to dare to say that Hermes 
(as a single individual) never existed! But the worthy 
Goropius, who appears to have flourished about 1580, 
judging by an antiquarian treatise of his on the race 
_ and language of the “ Cimbri or Germani” published at 
Amsterdam, had no followers as yet in a belief that 
is now universally accepted by all critical scholarship. 
But this has to do with the Hermes-saga and not 
directly with the question of the Trismegistic works, 

1 Op. cit., p. 3a. 

2 In which Patrizzi did but echo the opinion of his pre- 


decessors, such as Vergecius, the editor of the first edition of the 
Greek text, Candalle and many more. 


‘HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION 21 


and so we may omit for the present any reference to 
the host of contradictory opinions on “ Hermes” which 
are found in all the writers to whom we are referring, 
and none of which, prior to the decipherment of the 
hieroglyphics, are of any particular value. 


THE LAUNCHING OF THE THEORY OF PLAGIARISM 


It was about the middle of the seventeenth century 
that the theory of plagiarism and forgery was started. 
Ursin (Joh. Henr. Ursinus), a pastor of the Evangelical 
Church at Ratisbon, published at Niirnberg in 1661, a 
work, in the second part of which he treated of “ Hermes 
Trismegistus and his Writings,”! and endeavoured to 
show that they were wholesale plagiarisms from 
Christianity, but his arguments were subjected to a 
severe criticism by Brucker some hundred years later.” 

This extreme view of Ursin was subsequently modified 
into the subsidiary opinions that the Trismegistic works 
were composed by a half-Christian (semi-christiano) or 
interpolated by Christian overworking. 

The most distinguished name among the early holders 
of the former opinion is that of Isaac Casaubon,* who 
dates these writings at the beginning of the second 


1 De Zoroastre Bactriano Hermete Trismegisto Sanchoniathone 
Phemnicio eorumque Scriptis, et Alits contra Mosaice Scripture Anti- 
quitatem ; Exercitationes Fanuliares, pp. 73-180—a book now very 
scarce. 

2 Jacobi Bruckeri, Historia Critica Philosophie (2nd ed., Leipzig, 
1767), i. 252 ff. Lib. ii., cap. vii., “De Philosophia Aigyptiorum.” 
See also Meiners’ Versuch aber die Religionsgeschichte der dltesten 
Volker besonders der Egyptier (Gottingen, 1775). 

3 De Rebus Sacris . . . Exercitationes ad Card. Baronit Prole- 
gomena, i., n. 10 (London, 1614). Casaubon concludes that the 
whole book, i.e. the “ Pcemandres,” is a pseudepigraph, the pure 
invention of some Christian or other, or perhaps better, of some 
semi-Christian (p. 56). 


22 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


century ; Casaubon’s opinions, however, were promptly 
refuted by Cudworth in his famous work The True 
Intellectual System of the Universe, the first edition of 
which was printed at London, in folio, 1678.1 Cud- 
worth would have it, however, that Casaubon was right 
as far as the treatises entitled “The Shepherd of Men” 
and “The Secret Sermon on the Mountain” are con- 
cerned, and that these treatises were counterfeited by 
Christians since the time of Iamblichus—a very curious 
position to assume, since a number of the treatises 
themselves look back to this very “Shepherd” as the 
original document of the whole “ Poemandres” cycle. 
But, indeed, so far we have no arguments, no really 
critical investigation,? so that we need not detain the 
reader among these warring opinions, on which the cap 
was set by the violent outburst of Colberg in defence of 
orthodoxy against the Alchemists, Rosicrucians, Quakers, 
Anabaptists, Quietists, etc., of which fanatici, as he 
calls them, Hermes, he declares, was the Patriarch.’ 


THE ONLY ARGUMENT ADDUCED 


One might almost believe that Colberg was an incarna- 
tion of a Church Father continuing his ancient polemic 
against heresy ; in any case the whole question of heresy 


1 See his dissertation on Hermes and the Hermetic writings 
in the edition of 1820, vol. ii., pp. 128-155. 

2? Though Reitzenstein (p. 1) speaks of the “schneidende 
Kritik” of Casaubon. 

3 Vol, i, p. 89, of the following amply entitled work, Das 
Platonisch-Hermetisches [sic] Ohristenthum, begriffend die historische 
Erzehlung vom Ursprung und vielerley Secten der heutigen Fanatischen 
Theologie, unterm Namen der Paracelsisten, Weigelianer, Rosen- 
creutzer, Quiker, Bohmisten, Wiedertiuffer, Bowrignisten, Labadisten 
und Quietisten, by M. Ehre Gott Daniel Colberg, 2 vols. (Frank- 
furt and Leipzig, 1690, 1691). 


HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION 23 


was now revived, and the eighteenth and nineteenth 
century criticism of the Trismegistic works almost invari- 
ably starts with this prejudice in mind and seeks (almost 
without exception) to father the Trismegistic writings 
on Neoplatonism, which it regards as the most powerful 
opponent of orthodoxy from the third century onwards. 
Harles (1790) gives the references to all the main factors 
in the evolution of this opinion during the eighteenth 
century ;! but the only argument that the century 
produced—indeed, the only argument that has ever been 
adduced — is that the doctrines of the Trismegistic 
writings are clearly Platonic, and that too of that type 
of mystical Platonism which was especially the 
characteristic of the teaching of Iamblichus at the end 
of the third century A.D., and which is generally called 
Neoplatonism ; therefore, these writings were forged by 
the Neoplatonists to prop up dying Paganism against 
the ever more and more vigorous Christianity. We 
admit the premisses, but we absolutely deny the 
conclusion. But before pointing out the weakness of 
this conclusion of apologetic scholarship, we must deal 
with the literature on the subject in the last century. 
The eighteenth century produced no arguments in 
support of this conclusion beyond the main premisses 
which we have admitted? Has the nineteenth century 


1 Op. supr. cit.; the most “advanced” writer on the subject 
being Tiedemann, to whose work we have already referred ; but 
unfortunately we have not been able to procure a copy, and the 
British Museum is without it. Tiedemann thinks that none of 
the Trismegistic writings existed before the fourth century, while 
Fabricius himself, whose summary of prior opinion is overworked 
by Harles, assigns them to the time of Porphyry and Iamblichus, 
though Harles dates the earliest of them from the end of the first 
to the middle of the second century (p. 48, n.). 

2 It may be worth while here to record the opinion of Gibbon, 
who would ascribe a Christian origin to some of the Trismegistic 


24 -  “THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


produced any others so as to justify the position taken 
up by the echoes of opinion in all the popular encyclo- 
pedias with regard to these most valuable and beautiful 
treatises ? ! 

If our encyclopedias deign to rest their assertions 
on authority, they refer us to Fabricius (Harles) and 
Baumgarten-Crusius. We have already seen that Harles 
will not help us much; will the latter authority throw 
any more light on the subject? We are afraid not; 
for, instead of a bulky volume, we have before us a thin 
academical exercise of only 19 pp.,?in which the author 
puts forward the bare opinion that these books were 
invented by Porphyry and his school, and this mainly 
because he thinks that Orelli* had proved the year 
before that the Cosmogony of Sanchoniathon was 
invented by the “Platonici.” Moreover, was not 
Porphyry an enemy of Christ, for did he not write XV. 
Books against the Christians? All of which can 
scarcely be dignified with the name of argument, far 
less with that of proof. 


writings, and impatiently dismisses the subject by classing 
Hermes with Orpheus and the Sibyls as a cloak for Christian 
forgery (vol. ii. p. 69, Bury’s ed.), 

1 How the public is catered for may be seen from any popular 
“knowledge ”-digest. The following will serve as a specimen, 
taken from the article “ Hermes Trismegistus,” in The American 
Encyclopedia: a Popular Dictionary of General Knowledge, edited 
by Ripley and Dana (New York, 1874): “In the conflict 
between Neoplatonism and Christianity, the former sought to 
give a profounder and more spiritual meaning to the pagan 
philosophy, by combining the wisdom of the Egyptians and 
the Greeks, and representing it as a very ancient, divine 
revelation.” 

2 Delivered before the University of Jena at Pentecost, 1827, by 
Lud. Frid. Otto Baumgarten-Crusius. 

3 Orelli (J. C.), Sanchoniathonis Fragmenta de Oosmogonia et 
Theologia Phenicorum (Leipzig, 1826). 


eS 


HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION 25 


Tue THEORY OF HILGERS 


The same may be said of the short academical thesis 
of Hilgers} who first shows the weakness of Méhler’s 
strange opinion? that the author was a Christian who 
pretended to be a Pagan and inserted “errors” on 
purpose. Hilgers finally ends up with the lame con- 
clusion that Christian doctrine was known to the 
author of the “ Poemandres” cycle, especially the Gospel 
of “John” and Letters of Paul; but how it is possible to 
conjecture anything besides, he does not know. Of 
the possibility of the priority of the “ Poemandres” to 
the writings of “John” and Paul, Hilgers does not 
seem to dream; nevertheless this is as logical a de- 
duction as the one he draws from the points of contact 
between the two groups of literature. But Hilgers has 
got an axe of his own to grind, anda very blunt one at 
that; he thinks that “The Shepherd of Men” was 
written at the same time as “ The Shepherd of Hermas,” 
that simple product of what is called the sub-apostolic 
age—a document held in great respect by the early 
outer communities of General Christianity, and used 
for purposes of edification. Our “Shepherd,” Hilgers 
thinks, was written in opposition to the Hermas 
document, but he can do nothing but point to the 
similarity of name as a proof of his hypothesis. This 
topsyturvy opinion we shall seek to reverse in a 
subsequent chapter on “‘ Hermes’ and ‘ Hermas.’” 

As to the author of our “Shepherd,” Hilgers thinks 
he has shown that “he was not a follower of the 


1 Hilgers (B. J.), De Hermetis Trismegisti Poimandro Commen- 
tatio (Bonn, 1855), suggested by the appearance of Parthey’s text 
in 1854, 

2 Mohler (J. A.), Patrologie, pp. 950-951—a brief note on 
Hermes. Ed. by F. X. Reithmayr (Regensberg, 1840). 


26 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


doctrines of the Christ, but of the so-called Neoplaton- 
ists, and among these especially of Philo Judeus”; in 
fact he seems, says Hilgers, to have been a Therapeut.! 


THE GERMAN THEORY OF NEOPLATONIC “ SYNCRETISMUS” 


Here we have the first appearance of another ten- 
dency; the more attention is bestowed upon the 
Trismegistic writings, the more it is apparent that 
they cannot be ascribed to Neoplatonism, if, as generally 
held, Neoplatonism begins with Ammonius Saccas, 
Plotinus, and Porphyry in the third century. There- 
fore, in this subject, and in this subject alone, we find a 
tendency in later writers to push back the Neoplatonists 
so as to include Philo Judeus, who flourished in the 
first half of the first century! On these lines we 
should soon get Veo-platonism back to Plato and 
Pythagoras, and so be forced to drop the “Neo” and 
return to the old honoured name of simple “ Platonici.” 

But already by this time in Germany the theory of 
Neoplatonice Syncretismus to prop up sinking Heathen- 
dom against rising Christianity had become crystallised, 
as may be seen from the article on “Hermes, 
Hermetische Schriften” in Pauly’s famous Real En- 
cyclopddte der classischen Alterthumswissenshaft (Stutt- 
gart, 1844), where this position is assumed from the 
start. 

Parthey, however, in 1854, in his preface, ventures 
on no such opinion, but expresses a belief that we may 
even yet discover in Egypt a demotic text of the 
“ Poemandres,’ which shows that he considered the 
original to have been written in Egyptian, and there- 
fore not by a Neoplatonist. 


1 Op. cit., pp. 16-17. 


HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION 27 


THe French THEORY OF EGYPTIAN ORIGIN 


In France, moreover, the Egyptian paternity of the 
Trismegistic writings, and that too on very sensible 
lines, was asserted about the same time, namely, in 
1858, by Artaud in his article on “Hermés Trismé- 
giste,” in MHoeffer’s Nowvelle Biographie Générale, 
published at Paris by Messrs Firmin Didot. Artaud 
writes : 

“In the mystic sense Thoth or the Egyptian Hermes 
‘was the symbol of the Divine Mind; he was the incar- 
nated Thought, the living Word—the primitive type of 
the Logos of Plato and the Word of the Christians... . 

“We have heard Champollion, the younger, giving ex- 
pression to the formal opinion that the books of Hermes 
Trismegistus really contained the ancient Egyptian 
doctrine of which traces can be discovered from the 
hieroglyphics which cover the monuments of Egypt. 
Moreover, if these fragments themselves are examined, 
we find in them a theology sufficiently in accord with the 
doctrines set forth by Plato in his 7imeaeus—doctrines 
which are entirely apart from those of the other schools 
of Greece, and which were therefore held to have been 
derived by Plato from the temples of Egypt, when he 
went thither to hold converse with its priests.” ! 

Artaud is also of the opinion that these Trismegistic 
treatises are translations from the Egyptian. 


THE VIEWS OF MENARD 


Nowadays, with our improved knowledge of Egypt- 
ology, this hypothesis has to be stated in far more 

1 The whole of this article has been lifted, without acknowledg- 
ment, by M‘Clintock and Strong in their Cyclopedia of Biblical, 
Theological, and Ecclesiastical Literature (New York, 1872). 


28 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


careful terms before it can find acceptance among the 
learned; nevertheless it was evidently the conviction 
of Dévéria, who in a work of which he only succeeded 
in writing the first two pages, proposed to comment on 
the entire text of the Trismegistic Books from the point 
of view of an Egyptologist. For these Books, he 
declared, offered an almost complete exposition of the 
esoteric philosophy of ancient Egypt.! 

But by far the most sympathetic and really intelligent 
account of the subject is that of Ménard,? who gives us 
a pleasant respite from the chorus of the German 
Neoplatonic syncretism theory. And though we do 
not by any means agree with all that he writes, it will 
be a relief to let in a breath of fresh air upon the 
general stuffiness of our present summary of opinions. 

The fragments of the Trismegistic literature which 
have reached us are the sole surviving remains of that 
“Egyptian philosophy” which arose from the congress 
of the religious doctrines of Egypt with the philo- 
sophical doctrines of Greece. In other words, what 
the works of Philo were to the sacred literature of the 
Jews, the Hermaica were to the Egyptian sacred 
writings. Legend and myth were allegorised and 
philosophised and replaced by vision and instruction. 
But who were the authors of this theosophic method ? 
This question is of the greatest interest to us, for it is 
one of the factors in the solution of the problem of the 
literary evolution of Christianity, seeing that there are 
intimate points of contact of ideas between several 
of the Hermetic documents and certain Jewish and 
Christian writings, especially the opening verses of 
Genesis, the treatises of Philo, the fourth Gospel 


1 Pierret, Mélanges d Archéologie égyptienne et assyrienne, i. (1878), 
p.112; R.1,n.1. 
2 Op. sup, cit., 1866. 


—_— 


HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION 29 


(especially the Prologue), and beyond all the writings 
of the great Gnostic doctors Basilides and Valentinus. 

Such and similar considerations lead Ménard to 
glance at the environment of infant Christianity and 
the various phenomena connected with its growth, and 
this he does from the point of view of an enlightened 
independent historical scholar. 

“ Christianity,” he writes, “did not fall like a thunder- 
bolt into the midst of a surprised and startled world. 
It had its period of incubation, and while it was en- 
gaged in evolving the positive form of its dogmas, the 
problems of which it was seeking the solution were the 
subject of thought in Greece, Asia, and Egypt. Similar 
ideas were in the air and shaped themselves into all. 
sorts of propositions. 

“The multiplicity of sects which have arisen in our 
own times under the name of socialism, can give but 
a faint idea of the marvellous intellectual chemistry 
which had established its principal laboratory at Alex- 
andria. Humanity had set in the arena mighty philo- 
sophical and moral problems: the origin of evil, the 
destiny of the soul, its fall and redemption; the prize 
to be given was the government of the conscience. 
The Christian solution! won, and caused the rest to be 
forgotten, sunk for the most part in the shipwreck of 
the past. Let us then, when we come across a scrap 
of the flotsam and jetsam, recognise in it the work of 
a beaten competitor and not of a plagiarist. Indeed, 
the triumph of Christianity was prepared by those 
very men who thought themselves its rivals, but who 
were only its forerunners. The title suits them, though 
many were contemporaries of the Christian era, while 
others were a little later; for the succession of a religion 
only dates from the day when it is accepted by the 


1 The popular Christian solution, Ménard should have said. 


30 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


nations, just as the reign of a claimant to the throne 
dates from his victory ” (pp. ix., x.). 

Ménard distinguishes three principal groups in the 
Trismegistic treatises, which he assigns to Jewish, Greek, 
and Egyptian influences. In them also he finds a link 
between Philo and the Gnostics, 

“Between the first Gnostic sects and the Hellenic 
Jews represented by Philo, a link is missing; this can 
be found in several of the Hermetic works, especially 
‘The Shepherd of Men’ and ‘The Sermon on the 
Mountain.’ In them also will perhaps be found the 
reason of the differences, so often remarked upon, 
between the first three Gospels and the fourth” 
(p. xliv.). 

Next, the direction in which that “ link” is to be looked 
for is more clearly shown, though here Ménard is, I 
think, too precise when writing: 

“Tt seems certain that ‘The Shepherd’ came from 
that school of Therapeuts of Egypt, who have been 
often erroneously confounded with the Essenians of 
Syria and Palestine” (p. lvi.). 

But “instead of the physical discipline of the 
Essenians, who, according to Philo, practised manual 
labour, put the product of their toil into the common 
fund, and reduced philosophy to ethics, and ethics to 
charity, the ‘monasteries’ of the Therapeuts contri- 
buted to Christian propaganda a far more Hellenised 
population, trained in abstract speculations and mystic 
allegories. From these tendencies, combined with the 
dogma of the incarnation, arose the Gnostic sects. 
‘The Shepherd’ should be earlier than these schools” 
(p. lviii.). 

As to “The Sermon on the Mountain,” “it can be 
placed, in order of ideas and date, between ‘The 
Shepherd’ and the first Gnostic schools; it should be 


_——. ee 


HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION 31 


a little earlier than the founders of Gnosticism, 
Basilides, and Valentinus” (p. Ixv.). 

If Gnosticism be taken with Ménard to mean the 
Christianised theosophy of Basilides and Valentinus 
from the first quarter of the second century onwards, 
the oldest Trismegistic treatises are demonstrably earlier, 
for their Gnosticism is plainly a far simpler form; in 
fact, so much more simple that, if we could proceed 
on so crude an hypothesis as that of a straight-lined 
evolution, we should be forced to find room for inter- 
mediate forms of Gnosticism between them and the 
Basilidian and the Valentinian Gnosis. And of this 
Ménard seems to be partly conscious when writing: 
“ We can follow in the Hermetic books the destiny of 
this Judeo-Egyptian Gnosis, which, during the first 
century, existed side by side with Christianity without 
allowing itself to be absorbed by it, passing insensibly 
from the Jewish school of Philo to the Greek school 
of Plotinus” (p. lxvii.). 

Ménard here used the term Christianity for that 
tendency which afterwards was called Catholic or 
General Christianity, the body to which these very 
same Gnostics gave the principal dogmas of its sub- 
sequent theology. 

But if the Gnostics were Therapeuts, and the Tris- 
megistic. writers Therapeuts, why should Ménard call 
them Jews, as he appears to do in his interesting 
question, “Where are the Jewish Therapeuts at the 
end of the second century?” Certainly Philo laboured 
to give his readers the impression that the Therapeuts 
were principally Jews, perhaps to win respect for his 
compatriots in his apology for his nation ; but the Thera- 
peuts were, evidently, on his own showing, drawn from 
all the nations and scattered abroad in very numerous 
communities, though many Jews were doubtless in 


32 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


their ranks—indeed, Philo probably knew little about 
their communities other than the Mareotic. If, then, 
the term “Therapeut” will explain some of the 
phenomena presented by these writings, the combination 
“Jewish Therapeuts” will certainly not do so. The 
very answer of Ménard himself to his question shows 
that even these Mareotic Therapeuts could not have 
been orthodox Jews, for the French scholar proceeds to 
surmise not only that, “some, converted to Christianity, 
became monks or Gnostics of the Basilidian or Valen- 
tinian school,” but that “ others more and more assimi- 
lated themselves to Paganism.” 

And by “Paganism” our author says he does not 
mean “polytheism,” for “at this period all admitted 
into the divine order of things a well-defined hierarchy 
with a supreme God at the head; only for some this 
supreme Deity was in the world, for others outside it” 
(p. lxxiv.). 

Ménard’s introduction meets with the general 
approval of Reitzenstein (p. 1), who characterises it as 
Jeinsinnige, and agrees that he has rightly appreciated 
many of the factors, especially from the theological 
side; he, however (p. 116, n. 2), dissents, and rightly 
dissents, from Ménard as to any direct Jewish influence 
on the Trismegistic literature, and refuses to admit that 
the “ Poemandres” can in any way be characterised as a 
Jewish-Gnostic writing. 

But the sensible views of Ménard were impotent to 
check the crystallisation of the German theory, which 
was practically repeated by Zeller, and once more by 


1 Gesch, d. griech. Philos,, III., ii., 225 ff. Zeller, while recognising 
the Gnostic nature of C. H. i. and C. H. xiii. (xiv.), treats the rest 
of our Corpus as an expression of declining Paganism. So also 
Erdmann (Hist. Philos., i. 113, 2, Tr.), who deals with our Corpus 
only, and assigns its sermons to different authors and times. 


HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION 33 


Pietschmann in his learned essay,! based in part on A. 
G. Hoffmann’s article “ Hermes” in Ersch and Gruber’s 
Allgemeine Encyclopidie der Wissenschaften wnd Kiinste.? 

An exception to this tendency, however, is to be 
found in the opinion of Aall ; * who, though he adduces 
no proof, would on general grounds place the composition 
of the Hermetic literature (though whether or not by 
this he means our extant Trismegistic sermons is not 
clear) as far back as the second century B.C. and 
would see in it an offshoot from the same stem which 
later on supplied the ground-conceptions of the 
Johannine theology.’ 


ENGLISH ENCYCLOPZDISM 


In England, as we have seen, the subject, like so many 
others of a similar nature, has been almost entirely 
neglected, but with the encyclopedic activity of the 
past generation we find it touched upon, and in the 
usual encyclopedic fashion, The German position is 
assumed, without one word of proof or reference to any, 
as an “acquired fact of science”! The “last effort of 
expiring Heathendom” theory is trotted out with 
complacency and with that impressive air of official 
. knowledge which makes the pronouncements of the 
family physician a law unto all its members, from 
baby to father—until the specialist is called in. And 
He contends that ¢. H. xiii. (xiv.) shows a Neo-pythagorean 
tendency,—a term far vaguer than Neo-platonic even. 

1 Hermes Trismegistos n. digyp., griech. u. oriental. Uberlieferwngen 
(Leipzig, 1875). 

2 A laborious article replete with references, but dealing solely 
with the Hermes-saga and not with our writings. 

3 Aall (A.), Geschichte der Logosidee in der Philosophie (Leipzig, 
vol, i, 1896, vol. ii. 1899), ii. 78, n. 4. 

* Of. Reitzenstein, Zwei religionsgeschichtliche Fragen (Strassburg, 
1901), p. 93, n. 3. 

VOL. I. 3 


34 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


unfortunately these ex cathedrd encyclopedic pronounce- 
ments are all the general reader will ever hear. This 
is the case with all those three indifferent.articles in our 
current dictionaries of reference.1 We are assured that, 
“as all are generally agreed,” the writings are Neo- 
platonic, and this without any qualification or definition. 
of the term, and that too in dictionaries where the 
term “Neoplatonic,” in articles on the subject, is 
applied solely to the “Chain” from Ammonius Saccas 
and Plotinus onwards. The presumption is plain that 
by Neoplatonic forgeries we are to understand a date of 
at earliest from the middle of the third century 
onwards, 


CHAMBERS’S OPINION 


And this although Justin Martyr (cir. 150 A.D.) 
bestows emphatic praise on these very same writings 
and classes their writer, “Hermes,” among the “most 
ancient philosophers,” a point which the German 
theorists and their English copiers have all discreetly 
shirked, but which, together with other considerations, 
-has forced Chambers, in the preface to his translation 
(London, 1882), to give quite a new meaning to the 
term Neoplatonist, which he uses of Hermes in his 
title? and to declare that our Hermes is entitled “to 


1 Art. “Hermes and Hermes Trismegistus,” by L. Schmitz, in 
Smith’s Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology 
(London, 1870), a work which is now entirely out of date ; Jowett’s 
art., “ Hermes Trismegistus,” in the Encyclopedia Britannica 
(9th ed., London, 1880), repeated in the recent reprint without 
alteration ; and Mozley’s art., “Hermes Trismegistus,” in Smith 
and Wace’s Dictionary of Christian Biography (London, 1882); 
to both of which articles, if not to the works themselves, the above 
remark also applies, 

2 The Theological and Philosophical Works of Hermes Trismegistus, 
Christian Neoplatonist, 


HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION 35 


be considered the real fownder of Neoplatonism.”! 
Chambers would still, in spite of Justin’s clear testi- 
mony, wedge in the earliest deposit of Trismegistic 
literature immediately between the time of composition 
of the new canonical books and Justin, and devotes 
nearly all his notes to fishing out every verse of the 
New Testament he can which bears the slightest 
resemblance to the Trismegistic text.2 But if we 
closely compare these so-called parallels, we are 
compelled to acknowledge that if there be any 
plagiarism it is not on the side of Hermes; nay, 
more, it is as plain as it can be that there is no 
verbal plagiarism at all, and that the similarity of 
ideas therefore pertains to quite another problem, 
for the distinctive dogmas of Common Christianity 
are entirely wanting; there is not a single word 
breathed of the historical Jesus, not a syllable concern- 
ing the nativity, the crucifixion, resurrection, ascension 
or coming of Christ to judgment, as Chambers admits. 


GERMAN ENCYCLOPADISM 


Let us now turn to the pronouncements of German 
encyclopedism on the subject. F. A. Brockhaus’ 
Conversations-Lexikon (Leipzig, 1884) does but repeat 
the old hypothesis. The Trismegistic writings are 
“the last monuments of Heathendom”; the writer, 
however, grudgingly takes in the date of Justin Martyr 
in the sentence, “presumably the majority of these 
writings belong to the second century,” but not a 
word is breathed of how this conclusion is arrived at. 

A most valuable article, in fact far and away the 


1 Op. cit., p. xii. 
2 In this repeating de Foix, who attempted the same task more 
than three hundred years before, 


36 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


very best that has yet been done, containing innumerable 
references to all the articles in the most recent trans- 
actions of learned societies and to the papers in scien- 
tific periodicals, is that of Chr. Scherer on “ Hermes,” 
in W. H. Roscher’s Aufiihrliches Lexikon der griechischen 
wu. rémischen Mythologie (Leipzig, 1884, etc.). Un- 
fortunately this article deals solely with the Hermes 
of the Greeks, while for “ Hermes Trismegistos” we 
are referred to “Thoth,” an article which has not yet 
appeared. This brings our summary of opinions down 
to the close of the last century; we have probably 
omitted reference to some minor opinions, for no up- 
to-date bibliography exists on the subject, but we 
doubt that any work of importance has escaped our 
notice. 


A Recent ARTICLE BY GRANGER 


The most recent work done in England on the 
subject, in the present century, is an article by Frank 
Granger, who, in spite of some useful criticisms and 
suggestions on some points, is nevertheless in the main 
reactionary, and contends for a Christian origin of our 
most important tractates. The scope of his enquiry 
may be seen from his preliminary statement when he 
writes: 

“ We shall have little difficulty in showing, as against 
Zeller, that the book [? our Corpus, or the first Sermon 
only] is in the main homogeneous and of Christian 
origin. Not only so, our discussion will bring us into 
contact with the later Greek culture as it developed 
amid Egyptian surroundings, and will raise several 
problems of considerable importance. Among other 


1 “The Poemandres of Hermes Trismegistus,” in The Journal 
of Theological Studies, vol. v. No. 19, April 1904 (London). 


HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION 37 


things we shall have to trace the way in which Hermes 
passes over into Christian tradition, and how the 
Greek representations of Hermes furnished Christian 
art with one of its earliest motives. We shall further 
find in it a bridge by which we may pass over from 
Greek philosophy and science to modes of thought 
which are properly Christian. And yet the writer 
retains so much of the antique spirit that he can 
hardly be mistaken for an apologist of Paganism.” 

When, however, Granger attempts to prove his case, 
he breaks down utterly, being able to point to little 
besides the popular phrase “increase and multiply.” 
Towards the end of his enquiry, however, he sees that 
the traditional values of many factors will have to be 
altered by a study of our literature, as, for instance, 
when he writes : 

“The traditional estimate of Gnosticism, then, re- 
quires to be reconsidered, in the light of the Poemandres. 
It belongs to a time when religious definitions were 
still in the making—a time, therefore, when the 
limits of free discussion were not yet straitly drawn. 
Hence the various permutations of religious belief 
which we find in Ireneus, Hippolytus, Tertullian, 
would not be admitted by their exponents to be in 
conflict with the Christian faith, but would rather be 
regarded as exhibiting new and fruitful applications of 
principles common to all. Ecclesiastical opinion ulti- 
mately settled down in one direction rather than 
another. But until this process was complete, each 
living system of belief might count upon a possible 
victory,? and so, among others, the system which may 
be traced in the Poemandres, And the Poemandres is 
so far from being a merely heretical production, that 


1 Namely, that of the Good Shepherd. 
2 This is a reflection of Ménard’s sensible view. 


‘ 


38 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


its relation to orthodox belief may fairly be indicated 
by saying that it answers to the earlier intellectual 
position of Clement of Alexandria.” 

We should say rather that the difficulties in which 
our essayist is evidently involved by his hypothesis of 
Christian origin, would be considerably lessened by 
accepting the evidence on all hands which a more 
extended study of the Trismegistic and allied literatures 
affords, and by treating what he refers to as Gnosticism 
without qualification as the Christianised Gnosis, and 
not as Gnosticised Christianity. 

We thus find Granger compelled, in keeping with the 
above, to guess the date of the “Pomandres” as 
towards the end of the second century; but even so, 
he feels dissatisfied with himself, for he has to add: 
“ Nor does this date preclude us from finding occasional 
traces of even earlier material.” 

However we may dissent from Granger’s conclusions 
as to the “ Pomandres,” we agree with him in the 
importance he ascribes to the Gospel according to the 
Egyptians, in connection with which he writes ? 

“Tt is instructive to note that Salome, who plays so 
prominent a part in the Gospel according to the Egyp- 
tians, is the mother of St John? and that the same 
Gnostic circles in which this gospel is current were 
also those in which we hear for the first time of the 
Fourth Gospel. That is to say, the Fourth Gospel 
comes to us from the hands of the Alexandrine Gnostics. 
The system of Valentinus is really a somewhat fanci- 

1 Ibid., p. 406. 

2 Ibid., p. 411. 

3 I have never come across this statement before, and so regret 
that G. has not given his authority. If such were the tradition, 
it would be exceedingly instructive. Salome, however, in the 


fragments of this Gospel preserved to us, says categorically that 
she has never “ brought forth.” 


~ 


HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION 39 


ful commentary upon the opening chapters of St John’s 
Gospel.1_ Heracleon, the first great commentator ? upon 
St John, was both a Gnostic and at the same time was . 
really the master of Origen, and through him helped to 
determine the development of the orthodox theology. 
Now, the key to the interpretation of the Fourth 
Gospel is to be found in the Gnostic ideas which 
underlie the Poemandres, ideas to which Heracleon 
furnishes the clue. But the commentators have refused 
the help which the Gnostics could give, and the Fourth 
Gospel has been consistently misunderstood owing to 
the exaggerated stress which has been laid upon the 
doctrine of the Adyos.” 

I am not quite clear what the last sentence is 
intended to mean. Too great stress cannot be laid 
upon the doctrine of the Logos, for it is, as we shall 
show, the fundamental concept of Hellenistic theology ; 
but too great stress can and has been laid upon the 
illegitimate claim that the Proem of the Fourth Gospel 
embodies a peculiarly Christian doctrine. 

Moreover, if the Fourth Gospel emerges in Alexan- 
drine circles and is so essentially Gnostic, how can it 
be ascribed, as Granger appears to ascribe it, to “St 
John”? A very different conclusion seems to follow 
from Granger’s premisses. 

The conclusion of the most recent study by English 
scholarship on our “ Poemandres” is as follows: 

“The Poemandres, then, is a very striking exponent 
of the religious and philosophical ideas amid which 


1 It is not, even if the “opening chapters” be reduced to the 
Proem. Heracleon, one of the disciples of Valentinus, comments 
directly on this Proem, but from the point of view of a quite 
independent tradition. 

2 The first commentator of any kind of which we have any 
knowledge, rather. 


40 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Alexandrine theology arose. On the one hand it is 
in touch with Greek mythology and science; on the 
other, with Jewish and Christian literature. The 
author is more sober than most of his Gnostic con- 
temporaries; he is a more consistent reasoner than 
Clement.” ! 

But if, as we shall show, the date of the “ Poemandres ” 
must be pushed back demonstrably at least a hundred 
years, and if, as is exceedingly probable, it must go 
back still further, the whole problem is changed, and the 
relationship of all the factors alters proportionately. 


REITZENSTEIN AND THE DAWN OF RIGHT VIEWS 


But in the present century, by the publication 
of Reitzenstein’s Poimandres, the whole subject has 
been placed on a different footing and brought into a 
clearer light. Reitzenstein attacks the problem of the 
Trismegistic writings from an entirely objective, his- 
torical, philological, and literary standpoint. Being 
entirely emancipated from any theological preconcep- 
tions, he is always careful to point out that his 
conclusions are based solely on critical research in the 
domain of philology proper; he cannot, however, 
refrain at times from adding (somewhat slily) that 
these results are of the deepest interest to the theo- 
logian—indeed, we might say highly embarrassing if 
the theologian happens to be a traditionalist. 

The general scope of Reitzenstein’s essay may be 
gathered from his sub-title, “ Studies in Greek-Egyptian 
and Early Christian Literature.” Our Trismegistic 
writings form part of a large number of Greek written 
texts, the remains of a once exceedingly extensive 
Hellenistic theological literature; and by Hellenistic 

1 Ibid., p. 412. 


HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION 41 


theology is meant the blending of Greek and Oriental 
religious thought and experience. This Hellenistic 
theology was most strongly influenced by Egyptian 
conceptions and traditions. The Egyptian religion is 
known to have spread itself over the Hellenistic world, 
and every scholar will at once recall to mind how 
many Greek writers have treated expressly of the 
Egyptian religion, and how many passages in Greek 
literature refer to Egyptian beliefs, as compared with 
the very few which treat of Babylonian, Persian, or 
even Syrian. 

Nevertheless, the remains of this Hellenistic theo- 
logical literature have never been treated as a whole 
from the point of view of philology ; the cause of this 
has been the entire disregard of the subject by Chris- 
tian theologians, coupled with the grotesque grounds 
on which the consideration of the Hellenistic-Egyptian 
religion is usually set aside—one famous theologian 
lately going so far as to assert that the Egyptian 
worship was despised on all sides, both by Jews and 
Greeks, as the lowest depth of human superstition. 

As then Egypt had a provably dominant position 
in Hellenistic literature, so also must she have had 
in some sort a correspondingly strong influence on 
Hellenistic culture, and consequently on the develop- 
ment of Hellenistic religious experience. The evidence 
of this is afforded by the Early Christian literature. 

We have, therefore, here in these Greek-Egyptian 
and Early Christian documents the possibility of 
methodical work, seeing that it is a question of the 
comparative study of two contemporaneous literatures ; 
moreover, the language and typology of the Christian 
literature is bound to betray traces of the general 
Hellenistic theology of the time (pp. v., vi.). 

The study of Reitzenstein is thus a consideration of 


42 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


our Trismegistic literature as a whole, and the analysis 
and comparison of two of the most typical sermons with 
other Hellenistic documents and with Early Christian 
writings. 

This he does with praiseworthy and painstaking 
industry, with great acumen and admirable scholarly 
equipment; but his work is of no service to any but 
scholars, and that, too, to scholars who are specialists. 
It is a work bristling with technicalities of every 
description, and crammed with untranslated texts. In- 
deed, Reitzenstein belongs to that school of philological 
purists who think it a loss of dignity to translate 
anything ; this is a very convenient convention, and I 
myself have often wished that I could have availed 
myself of it when face to face with innumerable diffi- 
culties of translation. 

Reitzenstein, then, translates nothing, but busies 
himself with texts and the higher criticism of the 
subject. He, however, does not give us the text of 
our literature as a whole, or even of the Corpus 
Hermeticum, but only of four chapters and the frag- 
ments of a fifth. Moreover, the results of his in- 
vestigations are very difficult to summarise; indeed, 
he nowhere summarises them himself in any certain 
fashion, his chapters being on the whole of the nature 
of studies in the Trismegistic literature rather than a 
complete exposition. 

Nevertheless these studies are, beyond comparison, the 
most important and suggestive work that has yet been 
done on the subject; and as I shall avail myself of his 
labours on so many occasions in the sequel, I cannot 
refrain from acknowledging here the special debt of 
gratitude which all lovers of our sermons must feel to 
him, for compelling the attention of scholars to the 
first importance of the Trismegistic literature in the 


asePhcaly 


HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION 43 


domain of the history of the development of religious 
thought in the first centuries. 

The general scope of his studies will be seen from 
the titles of the main chapters:—I. Age of the “ Poi- 
mandres”; by “ Poimandres” R. means C. H., i. only. 
II. Analysis of the “Poimandres”; III. Fundamental 
Conception of the “ Poimandres”; IV. “Poimandres’ 
and the Egyptian Apocalyptic Literature; V. Expansion 
of the Hermetic Literature; VI. The Hermetic Corpus ; 
VII. The Later “ Poimandres” Document (The Prophet- 
Initiation). 

The theory of plagiarism from Christianity must for 
ever be abandoned. The whole literature is based on 
the “Pcemandres” as its original gospel, and the 
original form of this scripture must be placed at least 
prior to the second century A.D. How much earlier it 
goes back we cannot at present say with any exactitude ; 
before the beginning of the second century is the 
terminus ad quem—that is to say it cannot possibly 
be later than this; to seek, therefore, for traditional 
Christian thoughts in this document is henceforth 
deprived of any prospect of success (p. 36). 

Reitzenstein tells us (p. 2) that these writings in the 
first place interested him solely through their literary 
form, but that this interest became deepened as he 
gradually learned to value them as important records of 
that powerful religious movement which, like a flood, 
overflowed the West from the East, and, after preparing 
the way for Christianity, subsequently bore it along 
with it; the best and surest evidence of this religious 
revival is to be found in the literary form of Hellenistic 
theology. 

This in itself is of interest enough and to spare; and 
at a time when every scrap of contemporary literature 
is being so eagerly scanned for the smallest side-light it 


44 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


can throw on the environment and development of 
Christian origins, it is amazing that the Trismegistic 
writings should have been hitherto so studiously 
neglected, 


A Kery To Ecypt’s WISDOM 


But there is another and still more profoundly 
interesting side of the subject which we cannot expect 
to find treated in a purely philological, technical, and 
critical treatise. The more one studies the best of 
these mystical sermons, casting aside all prejudice, 
and trying to feel and think with the writers, the nearer 
one is conscious of approaching the threshold of what 
may well be believed to have been the true Adytum of 
the best in the mystery-traditions of antiquity. In- 
numerable are the hints of the greatnesses and 
immensities lying beyond that threshold—among other 
precious things the vision of the key to Egypt’s wisdom, 
the interpretation of apocalypsis by the light of the 
sun-clear epopteia of the intelligible cosmos, 

Such greatnesses and such mysteries have a power 
and beauty which the most disreputable tradition of 
the texts through unknowing hands cannot wholly 
disguise, and they are still recognisable, even though 
thus clad in the rags of their once fair garments, by 
those who have eyes to see and ears to hear. 

But to return to the points we raised in the opening 
of this chapter. 


THE SUGGESTED ANSWERS TO OUR QUESTIONS 


If we now re-state the problems we are considering 
in the interrogative form, we shall have to find answers 
to the following questions : 

Why did the early Church Fathers accept the Tris- 


HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF OPINION 45 


megistic writings as exceedingly ancient and authorita- 
tive, and in their apologetic writings quote them in 
support of the main impersonal dogmas of Christianity ? 

Why, in the revival of learning, for upwards of a 
century and a half did all the Humanists welcome them 
with open arms as a most valuable adjunct to Chris- 
tianity, and as being in accord with its main doctrines, 
so much so that they laboured to substitute Trismegistus 
for Aristotle in the schools ? 

Finally, why during the last two centuries and a 
half has a body of opinion been gradually evolved, 
infinitesimal in its beginnings, but well-nigh shutting 
out every other view, that these writings are Neo- 
platonic forgeries ? 

The answers to these questions are simple:—The 
Church Fathers appealed to the authority of antiquity 
and to a tradition that had never been called in question, 
in order to show that they taught nothing funda- 
mentally new—that, in brief, they taught on main points 
what Hermes had taught. They lived in days too 
proximate to that tradition to have ventured on bring- 
ing any charge of plagiarism and forgery against it 
without exposing themselves to a crushing rejoinder 
from men who were still the hearers of its “living 
voice” and possessors of its “written word.” 

The scholars of the Renaissance naturally followed 
the unvarying tradition of antiquity, confirmed by the 
Fathers of the Church, 

Gradually, however, it was perceived that, if the old 
tradition were accepted, the fundamental originality 
of general Christian doctrines—that is to say, the 
philosophical basis of the Faith, as apart from the 
historical dogmas peculiar to it—could no longer be 
maintained. It, therefore, became imperatively neces- 
sary to discredit the ancient tradition by every possible 


46 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


means. With what success this policy has been 
attended we have already seen ; we have also reviewed 
this growth of opinion, and shown its baseless character 
and the straits to which its defenders have been put. 

From the clouds of this obscurantism the sun of 
Thrice-greatest Hermes and the radiance of his Gnosis 
have once more shone forth in the skies of humanistic 
enquiry and unprejudiced research. He is no longer to 
be called bastard, and plagiarist, and thief of other 
people’s property, but must be regarded as a genuine 
teacher of men, handing on his own, and giving freely 
of his substance to all who will receive the gift. 


III 
THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 


THOTH (TEHUT!) 


THE present chapter will be devoted to a brief considera- 
tion of the nature, powers, and attributes of the divine 
personification Thoth (Tehuti), the Master of Wisdom 
and Truth, on the ground of pure Egyptian tradition. 
As I have unfortunately no sufficient knowledge of 
Egyptian, I am not in a position to control by the texts 
the information which will be set before the reader ; 
it will, however, be derived from the works of specialists, 
and mainly from the most recent study on the subject, 
the two sumptuous volumes of Dr E. A. Wallis Budge, 
the keeper of the Egyptian and Assyrian antiquities in 
the British Museum. 

First of all, however, let us see what the German 
scholar Pietschmann has had to say on Thoth in his 
monograph specially devoted to Thrice-greatest Hermes 
according to Egyptian, Greek, and Oriental traditions. 

The first part of Pietschmann’s treatise, in which he 
seems to be content, as far as his own taste and feeling 
are concerned, to trace the original of the grandiose 
concept of the Thrice-greatest to the naive conception 
of an “ibis-headed moon-god,” is devoted to the con- 
sideration of what he calls the god Tey-Tehuti among 

1 Hermes Trismegistos, nach digyptischen, griechischen und oriental- 
ischen Uberlieferungen (Leipzig, ri 

4 


48 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


the Egyptians. Why Pietschmann should have chosen 
this double form of the name for his sub-title is not 
very clear. The variants appear to be Teh, Tehu, Tehut, 
and Tehuti—of which it would seem that the Greek 
form Thoth is an attempt to transliterate Tehut. There 
are, however, it may be remarked, no less than eighteen 
variants of the name found in Greek and Latin. I 
should thus myself be inclined to use the form Tehut 
if it were permissible; but of this I am not quite sure, 
as the weak-sounding though undoubtedly more common 
form Tehuti, is usually employed by scholars. As, 
however, Tehuti, to my ears at any rate, is not a very 
dignified sounding cognomen, I shall use the Greek 
form Thoth as being the more familiar to English 
readers. 


THOTH ACCORDING TO PIETSCHMANN 


oe 


( Horapollo tells us that the ibis was the symbol of 
Thoth as the “master of the heart and reason in all 
'men,”! though why this was so must remain hidden 
_in the mystery of the “sacred animals,” which has not 
‘\ yet to my knowledge been in any way explained. 

/ And as Thoth, the Logos, was in the hearts of all, 
so was he the heart of the world whose life directed 
‘and permeated all things.” 

Thus the temple, as the dwelling of the God, was 
regarded as a model of the world, and its building as 
a copy of the world-building. And just as Thoth had 
ordained measure, number, and order in the universe, 
so was he the master-architect of temple-building 
and of all the mystic monuments, Thus, as the or- 
dering world-mind, a text addresses Thoth as follows: 

1 rdons Kapdlas kal Aoyiopod deandrns, p. 40, ed. Leemans. 


2 Der Gott, “der in pantheistischer Anschauungsweise die ganze 
Welt belehrend durchdrang,” writes Pietschmann, p. 14. 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 49 


“Thou art the great, the only God, the Soul of the 
Becoming.” } 

To aid him in the world Thoth has a spouse, or 
syzygy, Nehe-maut. She is, among the Gnostics, the 
Sophia-aspect of the Logos. She is presumably the 
Nature of our Trismegistic treatises. Together Thoth 
and Nehe-maut are the initiators of all order, rule, and 
law in the universe. 

Thus Thoth is especially the representative of the 
Spirit, the Inner Reason of all things; he is the 
Protector of all earthly laws, and every regulation of 
human society.? Says a text : 

“ His law is firmly established, like that of Thoth.” * 

As representative of the Reason immanent in the 
_world, Thoth is the mediator through whom the world 
‘is brought into manifestation. He is the Tongue of 
‘Ra, the Herald of the Will of Ra,‘ and the Lord of 
Sacred Speech.° 

“What emanates from the opening of his mouth, 
that cometh to pass; he speaks, and it is his command ; 
he is the Source of Speech, the Vehicle of Knowledge, 
the Revealer of the Hidden.” ® 


1 Pleyte, Zeitschrift fiir dgyptische Sprache und Alterthumskunde, 
1867, 10. The text is taken from a papyrus in the Leyden Museum. 

2 See Pietschmann, p. 15. 

3 From an ostrakon in the Louvre, De Horrack, Zeitschrift fiir 
ad S. wu. A., 1868, 2. And again at Denderah, the King is said 
to “establish the laws like Thoth the twice-great one.” See 
Diimichen, zbid., 1867, '74. 

4 Lepsius, Erster Gotterkrets, Taf. 1,2. Text S, 181. 

6 Brugsch, Wérterbuch, 803, and many other references. 

6 For a long list of references, see Pietschmann in loco. I have 
so far cited some of these references to show that the statements 
of Pietschmann are based upon very ample authority. In what 
follows, however, these references may be omitted as they are not 
owing to my own industry, and the scholar can obtain them from 
Pietschmann’s book for himself. 

VOL, I, 4 


50 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Thoth is thus the God of writing and all the arts and 
sciences. On a monument of Seti I. heis called “ Scribe 
of the nine Gods.” Hewrites “the truth of the nine Gods,” 
and is called “ Scribe of the King of Gods and men.” 

Hence he is naturally inventor of the hieroglyphics, 
and patron and protector of all temple-archives and 
libraries, and of all scribes. At the entrance of one 
of the halls of the Memnonium at Thebes, the famous 
“Library of Osymandias,” called “The great House of 
Life,” we find Thoth as “ Lord in the Hall of Books.” 

In the Ebers papyrus we read : “ His guide is Thoth, 
who bestows on him the gifts of his speech, who makes 
the books, and illumines those who are learned therein, 
and the physicians who follow him, that they may 
work cures,” 

We shall see that one of the classes of priests was 
devoted to the healing of the body, just as another 
was devoted to the healing of the soul. 

These books are also called “The Great Gnoses of 
Thoth.”? Thoth was thus God of medicine, but not so 
much by drugs as by means of mesmeric methods and 
certain “magic formule.” Thus he is addressed as 
“Thoth, Lord of Heaven, who givest all life, all health.” ® 


THE THREE GRADES OF THE EGYPTIAN MYSTERIES 


Moreover, Thoth was also Lord of Rebirth:* “Thou 
hast given life in the Land of the Living; Thou hast 


1 Op. cit., p. 16. 

2 Compare this title, die grossen Erkentnisse des Tehuti, with 
the Coptic Codex Brucianus—Voici le livre des gnoses de lInvis- 
able divin.” Amélineau, Notice sur le Papyrus gnostique Bruce, p. 
83 (Paris, 1891). See also Carl Schmidt, Gnostische Schriften 
in koptischer Sprache aus dem Codex Brucianus (Leipzig, 1892). 

3 Op. cit., p. 20. 

* Herr der Metempsychose (Lord of Palingenesis), says 
Pietschmann, p, 23. 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 51 


made them live in the Region of Flames; Thou hast 
given respect of thy counsels in the breasts and in 
the hearts of men—mortals, intelligences, creatures 
of light.” 

The Land of the Living was the Invisible World, a 
glorious Land of Light and Life for the seers of ancient 
Egypt. Mortals, Intelligences, Creatures of Light, 
were, says Pietschmann, the “three grades of the 
Egyptian mysteries.”1 These grades were, one may 
assume from our treatises: (1) Mortals—probationary 
pupils who were instructed in the doctrine, but who 
had not yet realised the inner vision; (2) Intelligences 
—those who had done so and had become “ men,” that 
is to say who had received the “ Mind”; (3) Beings (or 
Sons) of Light—those who had become one with the 
Light, that is to say those who had reached the nirvanic 
consciousness. 

So much for what Pietschmann can be made to tell 
us of Thoth as Wisdom-God among the Egyptians. 


THOTH ACCORDING TO REITZENSTEIN 


To the information in Pietschmann may be added that 
which is given by Reitzenstein in the second of his two 
important studies, Zwei religionsgeschichtliche Fragen 
nach ungedruckten Teaten der Strassburger Bibliothek 
(Strassburg, 1901). This second study deals with 
“Creation-myths and the Logos-doctrine,” the special 
Creation-myths treated of being found in a hitherto 
unpublished Greek text, which hands on purely 
Egyptian ideas in Greek dress and with Greek god- 
names, and which is of great interest and importance 
for the general subject of which our present studies 
form part. 

1 Op. cit., p. 24 n. 


Sz THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


The writer of this cosmogonical fragment was a 
priest or prophet of Hermes, and Hermes plays the 
most important part in the creation-story. Reitzenstein 
then proceeds to show that in the oldest Egyptian 
cosmogony the cosmos is brought into being through the 
Divine Word, which Thoth, who seems to have origi- 
nally been equated with the Sun-god, speaks forth. 
This gives him the opportunity of setting down the 
attributes ascribed to Thoth in Egypt in pre-Greek 
times.!. As, however, the same ground is covered more 
fully by Budge, we will now turn to his Gods of the 
Egyptians, or Studies in Egyptian Mythology (London, 
1904), vol. i. pp. 400 ff., and lay under contribution the 
chapter entitled “Thoth (Tehuti) and Maat, and the 
other Goddesses who were associated with him,” as the 
most recent work on the subject by a specialist in 
Egyptological studies, whose opinions, it is true, may 
doubtless on many points be called into question by 
other specialists, but whose data must be accepted by 
the layman as based on prolonged first-hand study of 
the original texts. In using the material supplied by 
Dr Budge, however, I shall venture on setting it forth 
as it appears to me—that is to say, with the ideas 
awakened in my own mind by the study of his facts. 


THOTH ACCORDING TO BUDGE 


In the Hymns to Ra in the Ritual or Book of the Dead, 
and in works of a similar nature, we find that Thoth 
and Maat stand one on either side of the Great God in 
his Boat, and that their existence was believed to be 
coeval with his own. Maat is thus seen to be the 
feminine counterpart, syzygy or shakti, of Thoth, and 
her name is associated with the idea of Truth and 

1 Op. cit., pp. 71 ff. 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 53 


Righteousness—that which is right, true, real, genuine, 
upright, righteous, just, steadfast, unalterable. 


His Derric TITLES 


From the inscriptions of the later dynastic period, 
moreover, we learn that Thoth was called “Lord of — 
Khemennu (Hermopolis), Self-created, to whom none 
hath given birth,God One.” He is the great Measurer, 
the Logos, “He who reckons in Heaven, the Counter 
of the Stars, the Enumerator of the Earth and of what 
is therein, and the Measurer of the Earth.” 

He is the “ Heart of Ra which cometh forth in the 
form of the God Thoth.” 

As Lord of Hermopolis, where was his chief shrine, 
and of his temples in other cities, he was called “ Lord 
of Divine Words,” “Lord of Maat,” “Judge of the two 
Combatant Gods ”—that is, of Horus and Set. Among 
other titles we find him called “'Twice-great,” and 
“ Thrice-great.” “From this last,” says Budge, “ were 
derived the epithets ‘ Trismegistus’ and ‘Termaximus’ 
of the classical writers.” We, however, doubt if this is 
so, and prefer the explanation of Griffith, as we shall 
see later on. 

In addition to these deific titles, which identify him 
with the Logos in the highest meaning of the term, he 
was also regarded as the Inventor and God of all arts 
and sciences ; he was “ Lord of Books,” “Scribe of the 
Gods,” and “Mighty in speech”—that is to say, “his 
words took effect,” says Budge; his was the power of | 
the “Spoken Word,” the Word whose language is 
action and realisation. He was said to be the author 
of many of the so-called “funeral works” by means of 
which the “deceased” gained everlasting life. These 
books were, however, rather in their origin sermons of 


54 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


initiation for living men, setting forth the “death 
unto sin and the new birth unto righteousness.” Thus 
in the Book of the Dead he plays a part to which are 
assigned powers greater than those of Osiris or even of 
Ra himself. 


His SYMBOLS AND NAME 


He is usually depicted in human form with the head of 
an ibis, or sometimes as an ibis; but why he is so 
symbolised remains a mystery even unto this day. It 
is also of little purpose to set down the emblems he 
carries, or the various crowns he wears, without some 
notion of what these hidden symbols of a lost wisdom 
may purport. The meanings of these sacred signs 
were clear enough, we may believe, to those who were 
initiated into the “ Language of the Word”; to them 
they revealed the mystery, while for the profane they 
veiled and still veil their true significance. 

Tehuti, the Egyptian name of Thoth, it has been 
suggested, is to be derived from tehu, the supposed 
oldest name of the ibis in Egypt; the termination ¢ 
thus signifying that he who was thus called possessed 
the powers and qualities of the ibis. 

But if this is the true derivation, seeing that Tehuti 
in his highest aspect is a synonym for the Logos of 
our system at the very least, I would suggest that we 
should rather exalt the “ibis” to the heavens than drag 
down the sublime concept of that Logos to considera- 
tions connected with a degenerate fowl of earth, and 
believe that the Egyptians chose it in wisdom rather 
than folly, as being some far-off reflection of a certain 
Great Bird of the Cosmic Depths, a member of that 
circle of Sacred Animals of which the now conventional 
Signs of the Zodiac are but faint sky-glyphs. 

But the derivation of the name Tehuti which seems 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 55 


to have been favoured by the Egyptians themselves was 
from tekh, which usually means a “weight,” but is also 
found as the name of Thoth himself. Now the determina- 
tive for the word tekh is the sign for the “heart”; 
moreover, Horapollo (i. 36) tells us that when the 
Egyptians wish to write “heart” they draw an ibis, 
adding, “for this bird was dedicated to Hermes (Thoth) 
as Lord of all Knowledge and Understanding.” Is it 
possible, however, that in this Horapollo was either 
mistaken or has said less than he knew; and that the 
Egyptians once wrote simply “heart” for Thoth, who 
presided over the “weighing of the heart,” but subse- 
quently, in their love of mystery, and owing to the 
name-play, substituted the bird ¢ekh or teknu, which 
we know closely resembled the ibis, for the more 
sacred symbol ? 

The now commonest name for Thoth, however, is Egy. 
hab, Copt. hibdi, Gk. ibis; and it is the white ibis (Abd 
Hannes) which is the Ibis religiosa, so say Liddell and 
Scott. Another of the commonest symbolic forms of 
Thoth is the dog-headed ape. Thus among birds he is 
glyphed as the ibis, among animals as the cynocephalus. 
The main apparent reason for this, as we shall see 
_ later on, is because the ibis was regarded as the wisest 
of birds, and the ape of animals. 

In the Judgment Scene of the Book of the Dead the 
dog-headed ape (Aan) is seated on the top of the beam 
of the Balance in which the heart of the deceased is 
weighed; his duty apparently is to watch the pointer 
and tell his master Thoth when the beam is level. 
Brugsch has suggested that this ape is a form of Thoth 


1 And this is the case with the latter even to-day, where in the 
Sidan the natives “believe that its intelligence is of the highest 
order, and that its cunning is far superior to that of man.” (Op. 
cit., i. 21.) 


56 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


as God of “equilibrium,” and that it elsewhere sym- 
bolises the equinoxes; but this does not explain the 
ape. Thoth is indeed, as we have seen, the Balancer— 
“ Judge of the two Combatant Gods,” ! Horus and Set; 
he it is who stands at the meeting of the Two Ways, at 
the junction of Order and Chaos; but this by no 
means explains the puzzling cynocephalus. It was 
in one sense presumably connected with a certain state 
of consciousness, a reflection of the true Mind, just as 
were the lion and the eagle (or hawk); it “mimicked” 
that Mind better than the rest of the “animals.” 
Horapollo (i. 16), basing himself on some Hellenistic 
sources, tells us that the Egyptians symbolised the 
equinoxes by a sitting cynocephalus. One of the reasons 
which he gives for this is delightfully “ Physiologic” ; 
he tells us that at the equinoxes once every two hours, 
or twelve times a day, the cynocephalus micturates.? 
From this as from so many of such tales we learn what 
the “sacred animal” did in heaven, rather than what 
the physical ape performed on earth. (Cf. R. 265, n. 3.) 


THE SHRINE OF THOTH 


“The principal seat of the Thoth-cult was Khemennu, 
or Hermopolis, a city famous in Egyptian mythology 
as the place containing the “high ground on which 
Ra rested when he rose for the first time.” 

Dare I here speculate that in this we have the 
mountain of our “Secret Sermon on the Mountain,” 


1 This is one of the most interesting of his titles: “Judge of 
the Rehehui, the Pacifier of the Gods, who dwelleth in Unnu” 
(Hermopolis). (Op. cit., i. 405.) 

2 This must have been the mystery folk-tale circulated by the 
priests, for Marius Victorinus repeats it (Halm, Rhet. Lat. Min., 
p- 223), and it is preserved in the Physiologos (xlv. p. 275— 
Lauchert). 


— ee 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 57 


and that it was in the Thoth mystery-tradition of 
Hermopolis that the candidates for initiation were 
taught to ascend the mountain of their own inner 
natures, on the top of which the Spiritual Sun would 
rise and rest upon their heads “for the first time,” as 
Isis says in our “ Virgin of the World ” treatise ? 


THOTH AND His Company oF EIGHT 


At Khemennu ! Thoth was regarded as the head of a 
Company of Eight—four pairs of divinities or divine 
powers, each a syzygy of male and female powers, 
positive and negative, active and passive, the oldest 
example of the Gnostic Ogdoad. 

This was long ago the view of Brugsch, and it is 
now strongly supported by Budge, on the evidence of 
the texts, as against the opinion of Maspero, who 
would make the Hermopolitan a copy of the Heliopolitan 
Paut, or Company, which included Osiris and Isis. 
Budge, however, squarely declares that “the four 
pairs of gods of Hermopolis belong to a far older 
conception of the theogony than that of the company 
of gods of Heliopolis.” 

If this judgment is well founded, we have here a 
most interesting parallel in the Osirian type of our 
Trismegistic literature, in which Osiris and Isis look to 
Hermes (Thoth) as their teacher, as being far older 
and wiser than themselves. 

The great struggle between Light and Darkness, 
of the God of Light and the God of Darkness, goes 
back to the earliest Egyptian tradition, and the fights 
of Ra and Apep, Heru-Behutet and Set, and Horus, 
son of Isis, and Set, are “in reality only different 

versions of one and the same story, though belonging 


1 Which means “ City of the Eight [Gods].” (Op. cit., i. 113.) 


58 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


to different periods.” The Horus and Set version is 
apparently the most recent. The names of the Light 
God and Dark God thus change, but what does not 
change is the name of the Arbiter, the Mediator, 
“whose duty it was to prevent either God from gaining 
a decisive victory, and from destroying one another.” 
This Balancer was Thoth, who had to keep the opposites 
in equilibrium. 


THE HousE OF THE NET 


The name of the Temple of Thoth at Khemennu, or 
the City of Eight, was Het Abtit, or “House of the 
Net ”—a very curious expression. From Ch. cliii. of 
the Ritual, however, we learn that there was a mysterious 
| Net which, as Budge says, “was supposed to exist in 
the Under World and that the deceased regarded it 
with horror and detestation. Every part of it—its poles, 
and ropes, and weights, and small cords, and hooks—had 
names which he was obliged to learn if he wished to 
escape from it, and make use of it to catch food for 
himself, instead of being caught by ‘those who laid 
snares.” 

Interpreting this from the mystical standpoint of 
the doctrine of Rebirth, or the rising from the dead— 
that is to say, of the spiritual resurrection of those 
who had died to the darkness of their lower natures 
and had become alive to the light of the spiritual 
life, and this too while alive in the body and not 
after the death of this physical frame—I would 
venture to suggest that this Net was the symbol of a 
certain condition of the inner nature which shut in 
the man into the limitations of the conventional life of 
the world, and shut him off from the memory of his true 
self. The poles, ropes, weights, small cords, and hooks 


a 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 59 


were symbols of the anatomy and physiology, so to say, 
of the invisible “body” or “carapace” or “egg” or 
“envelope” of the soul. The normal man was emeshed 
in this engine of Fate; the man who received the 
Mind inverted this Net, so to speak, transmuted and 
transformed it, so that he could catch food for himself. 
“Come ye after me and I will make you fishers of 
men.” The food with which the “ Christ” nourishes his 
“body” is supplied by men. 

Thus in a prayer in this chapter of the Ritual we 
read: “Hail, thou ‘God who lookest behind thee, 
thou ‘God who hast gained the mastery over thine 
heart,’? I go a-fishing with the cordage [? net] of the 
‘Uniter of the earth, and of him that maketh a way 
through the earth.* Hail ye Fishers who have given 
birth to your own fathers, who lay snares with your 
nets, and who go round about in the chambers of the 
waters, take ye not me in the net wherewith ye ensnare 
the helpless fiends, and rope me not in with the rope 
wherewith ye roped in the abominable fiends of earth, 
which had a frame which reached unto heaven, and 
weighted parts that rested upon earth.” ® 


1 Perhaps suggesting two-faced or Janus-like—before and be- 
hind, without and within. With this, however, may be compared 
the symbolic headdress or mask worn by the virgin Koré 
(Proserpina) in the Eleusinian Mysteries; she had, Athena- 
goras (xx. 292) tells us, “two ordinary eyes, and two in her fore- 
head, with her face at: the back of her neck.” 

2 Suggesting Thoth. 

3 Suggesting the power of him who can either wrap the Net 
round the man or open it in a new direction, so that the man can 
‘pass right through his body,” as Hermes says to Tat in one 
of our Sermons. 

* Suggesting ‘“‘ Christs” who have given birth to their Father, the 
Mind, in their hearts. 

5 The fiends of a once mighty frame suggest beings of a dai- 
monic nature. Perhaps there is a formal distinction intended 


60 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


And in another chapter (cxxxiii.) the little man says 
- to the Great Man within him: “ Lift thyself up, O thou 
Ra, who dwellest in this divine shrine ; draw thou unto 
thyself the winds, inhale the North wind, and swallow 
thou the begesw of thy net on the day wherein thou 
breathest Maat.” 

“On the day wherein thou breathest Maat” suggests 
the inbreathing or inspiration of Truth and Righteous- 
ness, the Holy Ghost, or Holy Breath or Life, the 
Spouse of the Ordering Mind or Logos. The winds 
are presumably the four great cosmic currents of the 
Divine Breath, the North wind being the “down- 
breath ” of the Great Sphere. 

The term begesu has not yet been deciphered (can it 
mean knots ?); but the swallowing of the Net seems to 
suggest the transformation of it, inwardly digesting of 
it, in such a fashion that the lower is set free and 
becomes one with the higher. 

And that this idea of a net is. very ancient, 
especially in its macrocosmic significance, is evidenced 
by the parallel of the Assyrian and Babylonian 
versions of the great fight between the Sun-god Mar- 
duk and the Chaotic Mother Tiamat and her titanic 
and daimonic powers of disordered motion and in- 
stability — both Egyptian and Babylonian traditions 
probably being derived from some primitive common 
source. 

“He (Marduk) set lightning in front of him, with 
burning fire he filled his body. He made a net to en- 
close the inward parts of Tiamat, the Four Winds he set 
so that nothing of her might escape; the South wind 
and the North wind, and the East wind and the West 


by the epithet “helpless” and “abominable,” corresponding 
with the rational and irrational aspects of the soul as set forth in 
our sermons. 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 61 


wind, he brought near to the net which his father Anu 
had given him.”? 

Now in the Hymns of the popular Hermes-cult found 
in the Greek Magic Papyri, one of the most favourite 
forms of address to Hermes is “O thou of the four 
winds.” Moreover, we may compare with the rope with 
which the Fishers “rope the abominable fiends of 
earth,” the passage of Athenagoras to which we have 
already referred, and in which he tells us concerning 
the Mysteries that the mythos ran that Zeus, after 
dismembering his father, and taking the kingdom, pur- 
sued his mother Rhea who refused his nuptials. “ But 
she having assumed a serpent form, he also assumed the 
same form, and having bound her with what is called 
the ‘ Noose of Hercules’ (r@ xadouuévo “Hpakrewrixo 
dupar:), was joined with her. And the symbol of this 
transformation is the Rod of Hermes.” 

Here again it is the symbolic Caduceus that repre- 
sents the equilibrium between the opposed forces; it 
is the power of Thoth that binds and loosens; he holds 
the keys of heaven and hell, of life and death. It is 
further quite evident that Athenagoras is referring to 
a Hellenistic form of the Mysteries, in which the 
influence of Egypt is dominant. The “ Noose of Her- 
cules ” is thus presumably the “ Noose of Ptah.” Now 
Ptah is the creator and generator, and his “ Noose” or 
“Tie” is probably the Ankh-tie or symbol of life, the 
familiar crux ansata, of which the older form is 
a twisted rope, probably representing the binding 
together of male and female life in generation. Ptah 
is also the God of Fire, and we should not forget that it 
is Hephaistos in Greek myth who catches Aphrodite and 
Ares in a Net which he has cunningly contrived—at 
which the gods laughed in High Olympus. 

1 King (L. W.), Babylonian Religion, p.-71. 


62 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


In the list of titles of the numerous works belonging 
to the cycle of Orphic literature, one is called The Veil 
(IIlérdos) and another The Net (Aikrvoy). 

In the Panathenza the famous Peplum, Veil, Web, 
or Robe of Athena, the Goddess of Wisdom, was borne 
aloft like the sail of a galley; but this was the symbol 
only of the Mysteries. Mystically it signified the 
Veil of the Universe, studded with stars, the many- 
coloured Veil of Nature,? the famous Veil or Robe of 
Isis, that no “ mortal” or “dead man” has raised, for 
that Veil was the spiritual nature of the man himself, 
and to raise it he had to transcend the limits of 
individuality, break the bonds of death, and so become 
consciously immortal. 

Eschenbach ° is thus quite correct when, in another 
of its aspects, he refers this Veil to the famous Net of 
Vulcan. Moreover Aristotle, quoting the Orphie writ- 
ings, speaks of the “living creature born in the webs 
of the Net” ;+ while Photius tells us that the book of 
Dionysius Ageensis, entitled Netting, or Concerning Nets 
(Arcrvaka), treated of the generation of mortals,® 
And Plato himself likens the intertwining of the nerves, 
veins, and arteries to the “ network of a basket” or a 
bird-cage.® 

All of which, I think, shows that Thoth’s Temple of 
the Net must have had some more profound significance 
in its name than that it was a building in which 
“the emblem of a net, or perhaps a net itself, was 
venerated,” as Budge lamely surmises. 


1 See my Orpheus (London, 1896), pp. 39 and 44 ff. 

2 Of. Philo, De Som., i. (v. 92—Pfeiff)—71d wayumolkirovy Spacua 
tovrovt Toy Kéopov. 

8 Eschenbach (A. C.), Epigenes de Poest Orphica (Niirnberg, 
1702), p. 51. 

* De Gen. Anim., II. i. 613¢. 

> Bibl., clxxxv. ® Tim., 1079R. 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 63 


THOTH THE LOGOS 


But to resume. We have seen that Thoth was con- 
sidered to be the “heart” and “tongue” of Ra the 
Supreme—that is, not only the reason and mental 
powers of the god Ra, and the means whereby they 
were translated into speech, but rather the Controller 
of the life and Instrument of the utterance of the 
Supreme Will; He was the Logos in the fullest sense 
of that mysterious name, the Creative Word. He it is 
who utters the “ words” whereby the Will of the Supreme 
is carried into effect, and his utterance is that of 
Necessity and Law; his “words” are not the words of 
feeble human speech, but the compelling orders of 
the Creative Will. 

“He spoke the words which resulted in the creation 
of the heavens and the earth, and he taught Isis the 
words which enabled her to revivify the dead body of 
Osiris, in suchwise that Osiris could beget a child by 
her ; and he gave her the formule which brought back 
her son Horus to life after he had been stung to death 
by a scorpion.” 

All of which, I believe, refers microcosmically to the 
mystery of the resurrection from the dead, by the 
power of the Logos. “Osiris” must die before he can 
be raised, and beget a son, who is himself, by im- 
/maculate conception within his own spiritual nature. 
“Horus” must be poisoned to death by the scorpion of 
“Typhon” before he can be raised by the baptism of © 
the pure waters of Life. 


THe Worps or THOTH 


Thoth’s “knowledge and powers of calculation 
measured out the heavens and planned the earth, and 


64 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


everything which is in them; his will and power kept 
the forces in heaven and earth in equilibrium ; it was his 
skill in celestial mathematics which made proper use of 
the laws (madt) upon which the foundation and main- 
tenance of the universe rested; it was he who directed 
the motions of the heavenly bodies and their times and 
seasons; and without his words the gods, whose exist- 
ence depended upon them, could not have kept their 
place among the followers of Ra”—but would presum- 
ably have disappeared into another universe. 

Thoth is the Judge of the dead, the Recorder and 
Balancer of all “words,” the Recording Angel; for the 
testing of the soul in the Balance of the Hall of Osiris 
is called the “ weighing of words” and not of “actions.” 
But these “ words” were not the words a man uttered, 
nor even the “ reasons” he thought he had for his deeds, 
but the innermost intentions of his soul, the ways of the 
will of his being. 

This doctrine of “words” as expressions of will, 


however, had, in addition to its moral significance, a 


magical application. “The whole efficacy of prayer 
appears to have depended upon the manner and tone of 
voice in which the words were spoken.” 

It was Thoth who taught these words-of-power and 
how to utter them; he was the Master of what the 
Hindus would call mantra-vidyad, or the science of in- 
vocation or sacred chanting. These mantrah were held 
in ancient Egypt, as they were and are to-day in India, 
and elsewhere among knowers of such matters, of 
special efficacy in affecting the “bodies” and con- 
ditions of that fluid nature which exists midway 
between the comparative solidity of normal physical 
nature and the fixed nature of the mind. 

These “ words ” were connected with vital “ breath” 
and the knowing use of it; that is to say, they were 

¥ 


—s oe ; 


— — —e 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 65 


only really efficacious when the spoken words of 
physical sound corresponded naturally in their vowels 
and consonants, or their fluid and fixed elements, with 
the permutations and combinations of the inner 
elements of Nature; they then and only then were maa 
or true or authentic or real—that is to say, they were 
“ words-of-power” in that they compelled matter to 
shape itself according to true cosmic notions. 

Thus in a book called The Book of Breathings, it is 
said: “Thoth, the most mighty God, the Lord of 
Khemennu, cometh to thee, and he writeth for thee Zhe 
Book of Breathings with his own fingers.1 Thus thy 
soul shall breathe for ever and ever, and thy form 
shall be endowed with life upon earth, and thou shalt 
be made a God, along with the souls of the Gods, and 
they shall be the heart of Ra [for thee], and thy 
members shall be the members of the Great God.” 


THOTH AND THE OSIRIFIED 


In the Ritual we learn of the services which Thoth 
performs for “Osiris,” that is for the Osirified, for 
he repeats them for every man who has been acquitted 
in the Judgment. Of three striking passages quoted by 
Budge, we will give the following as the most compre- 
hensible, and therefore the seemingly most important 
for us. It is to be found in Ch. clxxxiii. and runs as 
follows, in the words placed in the mouth of the one 
who is being resurrected into an Osiris. 

“T have come unto thee, O son of Nut, Osiris, Prince 
of everlastingness ; I am in the following of God Thoth, 
and I have rejoiced at everything which he hath done 
for thee. He hath brought unto thee sweet air for thy 
nose, and life and strength for thy beautiful face, and 


1 The symbol of his actualising power. 
VOL. I. 


66 .. THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


the North wind which cometh forth from Tem for 
thy nostrils. ... He hath made God Shu to shine 
upon thy body; he hath illumined thy path with rays 
of splendour ; he hath destroyed for thee [all] the evil 
defects which belong to thy members by the magical 
power of the words of his utterance. He hath made 
the two Horus brethren to be at peace for thee; he 
hath destroyed the storm wind and the hurricane; he 
hath made the Two Combatants to be gracious unto thee, 
and the two lands? to be at peace before thee ; he hath 
put away the wrath which was in their hearts, and each 
hath become reconciled unto his brother.” 


THOTH THE MEASURER 


Budge then proceeds to give the attributes of Thoth 
as connected with time-periods and the instruments of 
time, the sun and moon. As Aah-Tehuti, he is the 
Measurer and Regulator of times and seasons, and is 


clearly not the Moon-god simply—though Budge says 


that he clearly is—for Thoth as Aah is the “ Great Lord, 
_ the Lord of Heaven, the King of the Gods”; he is the 
“Maker of Eternity and Creator of Everlastingness.” 
He is, therefore, not only the Aton, but its creator; 
and that is something vastly different from the Moon- 
god. 


THE TITLE “ TuHricr-GREATEST ” 


On p. 401 our authority has already told us that 
one of the titles of Thoth is “ Thrice-great,” and that 
the Greeks derived the honorific title Trismegistus 
from this; but on p. 415 he adds: “The title given 
to him in some inscriptions, ‘ three times great, great’ 


1 Showing that Set is Horus in his form of darkness, 
? Mystically, the upper and lower kingdoms in man. 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 67 


[that is, greatest], from which the Greeks derived 
their appellation of the god 6 rpiopuéyioros, or ‘ter 
maximus, has not yet been satisfactorily explained, 
and at present the exact meaning which the Egyptians 
assigned to it is unknown.” 

If this title is found in the texts, it will settle a 
point of long controversy, for it has been strenuously 
denied that it ever occurs in the _hieroglyphics; 
unfortunately, however, Dr Budge gives us no 
references. To the above sentence our distinguished 
Egyptologist appends a note to the effect that a 
number of valuable facts on the subject have been 
collected by Pietschmann in the book we have already 
made known to our readers. We have, however, not 
been able to find any valuable facts in Pietschmann 
which are in any way an elucidation of the term Thrice- 
greatest; but to this point we will return in another 
chapter. 


THE SUPREMACY OF THOTH 


The peculiar supremacy ascribed to Thoth by the 
Egyptians, however, has been amply demonstrated, and, 
as the great authority to whom we are so deeply indebted, 
says in his concluding words: “It is quite clear that 
Thoth held in their minds a position which was quite 
different from that of any other god, and that the 
attributes which they ascribed to him were unlike the 
greater number of those of any member of their com- 
panies of gods. The character of Thoth is a lofty and 
a beautiful conception, and is, perhaps, the highest idea 
of deity ever fashioned in the Egyptian mind, which, 
as we have already seen, was somewhat prone to dwell 
on the material side of divine matters. Thoth, how- 
ever, as the personification of the Mind of God, and as 
the all-pervading, and governing, and directing power 


68 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


of heaven and earth, forms a feature of the Egyptian 
religion which is as sublime as the belief in the 
resurrection of the dead in a spiritual body, and as the 
doctrine of everlasting life.” 

Thoth is then the Logos of God, who in his relation 
to mankind becomes the Supreme Master of Wisdom, 
the Mind of all masterhood. 

We will now turn to one whose views are considered 
heterodox by conservative and unimaginative critics,? 
who confine themselves solely to externals, and to the 
lowest and most physical meanings of the hiero- 
glyphics—to one who has, I believe, come nearer to 
the truth than any of his critics, and whose labours 
are most highly appreciated by all lovers of Egyptian 
mystic lore. 


THE VIEWS OF A SCHOLAR-MystTIC 


The last work of W. Marsham Adams ® deserves the 
closest attention of every theosophical student. Not, 
however, that we think the author’s views with regard 
to a number of points of detail, and especially with 
regard to the make-up of the Great Pyramid, are to be 
accepted in any but the most provisional manner, for 
as yet we in all probability do not know what the full 
contents of that pyramid are, only a portion of them 
being known to us according to some seers. The chief 
merit of the book before us is the intuitional grasp of 

1 “Thoth the Wise” of the “Inscription of London” § 4 (R. 
64), to which we shall refer later on. 

2 See the reviews on the below-mentioned work in The Atheneum 
of 3lst December 1898, and The Academy of 31st December 1898 
and 7th January 1899. 

3 The Book of the Master, or The Egyptian Doctrine of the Light 
born of the Virgin Mother (London, 1898)—a sequel to his study 
entitled The House of the Hidden Places, a Clue to the Oreed of 
Early Egypt from Egyptian Sources (London, 1895). 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 69 


its author on the general nature of the mystery-cultus, 
as derived from the texts, and especially those of the 
Ritual or the so-called Book of the Dead, as Lepsius 
named it, setting a bad fashion which is not yet out of 
fashion. The Egyptian priests themselves, according 
to our author, called it The Book of the Master of the 
Secret House, the Secret House being, according to 
Adams, the Great Pyramid, otherwise called the “ Light.” 


THE SPIRITUAL NATURE OF THE INNER TRADITION 
OF EGYPTIAN WISDOM 


In his Preface the author gives us clearly to understand 
that he regards the Wisdom of Egypt as forming the 
main background of some of the principal teachings 
of Early Christianity; and that this view is strongly 
confirmed by a careful study of the Trismegistic 
literature and its sources, will be made apparent in the 
course of our own labours. But before we proceed to 
quote from the former Fellow of New College, Oxford, 
whose recent death is regretted by all lovers of Egypt's 
Wisdom, we must enter a protest. 

Mr Adams has severely handicapped his work; 
indeed, he has destroyed nine-tenths of its value for 
scholars, by neglecting to append the necessary references 
to the texts which he cites. Such an omission is 
suicidal, and, indeed, it would be impossible for us to 
quote Mr Adams were it not that our Trismegistic 
literature permits us—we might almost say compels us 
—to take his view of the spiritual nature of the inner 
tradition of Egyptian Wisdom. Not, however, by any 
means that our author has traversed the same ground; 
he has not even mentioned the name of the Thrice- 
greatest one, and seems to have been ignorant of our 
treatises. Mr Adams claims to have arrived at his 


70 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


conclusions solely from the Egyptian texts themselves, 
and to have been confirmed in his ideas by personal 
inspection of the monuments. In fact, he considers it 
a waste of time to pay attention to anything written in 
Greek about Egyptian ideas, and speaks of “the distor- 
tion and misrepresentation wherein those ideas were 
involved, when filtered through the highly imaginative 
but singularly unobservant intellect of Greece.”! Thus 
we have a writer attacking the same problem from a 
totally different standpoint—for we ourselves regard the 
Greek tradition of the Egyptian Gnosis as a most 
valuable adjunct to our means of knowledge of the 
Mind of Egypt—and yet reaching very similar con- 
clusions.: 


THe Hoty LANp or Eaypt AND 1TS INITIATES 


The Holy Land of those’who had gone out from the 
body, watered by the Celestial Nile, the River of 
Heaven, of which the earthly river was a symbol and 
parallel, was divided into three regions, or states: 
(1) Rusta, the Territory of Initiation ; (2) Aahlu, the 
Territory of Illumination; and (3) Amenti, the Place 
of Union with the Unseen Father.” 

“Tn the religion of Egypt, the deepest and most 
fascinating mystery of antiquity, the visible creation, 
was conceived as the counterpart of the unseen world.’ 
And the substance consisted not of a mere vague belief 
in the life beyond the grave, but in tracing out the 
Path whereby the Just, when the portal of the tomb is 
lifted up,* passes through the successive stages of 

1 Op. cit., pref. v. 

2 Op. cit.. 18. Compare with this the three grades of Initia- 
tion given by Pietschmann (p. 24 n.), as cited above, p. 51. 


3 The image-doctrine of our treatises. 
4 This is an error; true initiation consisted in the fact that 


ee 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 71 


Initiation, of Illumination, and of Perfection, necessary 
to fit him for an endless union with Light, the Great 
Creator.” + 

Thus we are told that at a certain point in Aahlu, 
the Territory of Illumination, the Osirified, the purified 
soul, has achieved the “ Passage of the Sun”—that is 
to say, has passed beyond the mortal mind-plane; he 
opens the Gates of the Celestial Nile and receives the 
Atf-crown of Illumination, “fashioned after the form 
of the Zodiacal light, the glory of the supreme heaven.” 
This is presumably the “crown of lives” referred to in 
our sermons, which he receives in the sphere called 
“ight,” and with which he goes to the Father. 

The Guide and Conductor through all these grades 
was Thoth the Eternal Wisdom ;? and we are told 
that: 


THOTH THE INITIATOR 


“Thoth the Divine Wisdom, clothes the spirit of the 
Justified? a million times in a garment of true linen,‘ of 


cosmic consciousness was realised in the body, while a man still 
lived. This consciousness naturally included the after-death 
consciousness as part of its content. 
1 Op. cit., p. 24. 
2 Op. cit., pp. 14, 15. 
3 That is, he who has the “ balanced ” nature. 
4 In my Did Jesus Live 100 2.0.?—in treating of the Elxai tradition 
and the wild statements of the puzzled and puzzling Epiphanius, 
_Iasked: “ May there not have been a mystery-teaching behind the 
beautiful historicised story of the sisters Mary and Martha, and of 
Lazarus, their brother, who was ‘ raised from the dead’ after being 
‘three days’ in the grave? Was not Lazarus raised asa‘ mummy’ 
swathed in grave-clothes?” In this connection it is interesting 
to find Tertullian (De Corona, viii. ; Oehler, i. 436) referring to 
the “linen cloth” with which Jesus girt himself in John xiii. 4, 5, 
as the “ proper garment of Osiris.” The proper garment of Osiris 
at one stage consisted most probably of the symbolic linen 
wrappings of the “mummy.” 


72 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


that substance, that is to say, which by its purity and 
its brilliancy reminds us of the mantles, woven out of 
rays of light, wherewith the sun enwraps the earth 
afresh each day as she rotates before him; just as the 
soul of man is invested with new radiance each time 
that he turns to the presence of his Creator.” Again, 
‘fn the harmonious proportion of the universe,” the 
Egyptians saw “the Eternal Wisdom, Thoth, ‘the Mind 
and Will of God”? 

We have seen that Pietschmann considers the original 
of Thoth, the God of Wisdom, to be nothing more than 
the ibis-headed moon-god, thus intentionally deriving 
the origin of the Great Initiator from what he considers 
to be the crude beginnings of primitive ideas. But Thoth 
was the Great Reckoner, the Recorder of the Balance 
of Justice, the Teller of the Karmic Scales. Now the 
mortal time-recorder for the Egyptians was the moon, 
“for if we consider the motion of the moon relatively 
to the sun, we shall find that the time that it takes 
in covering a space equal to its own disc is just an 
hour. . . . Now, that measure of the ‘Hour’ was 
peculiarly sacred in Egypt; each of the twenty-four 
which elapse during a single rotation of the earth being 
consecrated to its own particular deity, twelve of 
light and twelve of darkness. ‘Explain the God in 
the hour, is the demand made of the adept in the 
Ritual when standing in the Hall of Truth. And that 
God in the hour, we learn, was Thoth, the ‘ Lord of the 
Moon and the Reckoner of the Universe.’” ? 

Again, with regard to the moon-phases, the first day 
of the lunar month was called “the conception of the 
moon,” the second its ‘‘ birth,” and so on step by step 
till it was full. Now the time of all lower initiations 
was the full moon. Thus “in the lunar representations 


1 Op. cit., p. 23. 2 Op. cit., p. 30. 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 73 


on the walls of the temple of Denderah we have fourteen 
steps leading up to the fifteenth or highest, whereon 
was enthroned Thoth, the Lord of the Moon.” ! 

For some such reasons was Thoth called Lord of the 
Moon, not that the moon gave birth to the idea of Thoth. 
We must not seek for the origin of the Wisdom-tradition 
in its lower symbols. For in the inscription on the 
coffin of Ankhnes-Ra-Neferab—that is of her “ whose 
life was the Sacred Heart of Ra”—we read: “ Thy name 
is the Moon, the Heart of Silence, the Lord of the 
Unseen World” 2—of the space “as far as the moon,” 
or the “sublunary region,” as the old books say, the 
first after-death state, where souls are purified from 
earthly stains. 


SOME OF THE DOCTRINES OF INITIATION 


The end set before the neophyte was illumination, 
and the whole cult and discipline and doctrines insisted 
on this one way to Wisdom. The religion of Egypt 
was essentially the Religion of the Light. 

But “most characteristic of all was the omnipotent 
and all-dominating sense of the fatherhood of God, 
producing the familiar and in some respects even joyous 
aspect which the Egyptians imparted to the idea of 
death.” And “to the sense which the priests at least 
possessed, both of the divine personality and of their 
own ultimate union with the personal deity [the Logos], 
far more probably than to any artificial pretension to a 
supposed exclusiveness, may be ascribed the mystery 
enshrouding their religion.” * 

And as Light was the Father of the Religion of 
Illumination, so was Life, his consort or syzygy, the 
Mother of the Religion of Joy. “Life was the centre, 


Op. cit., p. 194. — ? Op. cit., p. 161. 3 Op. cit., pp. 18, 20. 


74 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


the circumference, the totality of Good. Life was the 
sceptre in the hand of Amen; life was the richest ‘ gift 
of Osiris.’ ‘Be not ungrateful to thy Creator,’ says the 
sage Ptah-Hotep, in what is perhaps the oldest document 
in existence, ‘for he has given thee life.” ‘I am the 
Fount of Light,’ says the Creator in the Ritual. ‘I 
pierce the Darkness, I make clear the Path for all; 
the Lord of Joy.’”1 Or again, as the postulant prays 
to the setting sun: “O height of Love, thou openest 
the double gate of the Horizon.” * 

Here we have the full doctrine of the Light and Life 
which is the keynote of our treatises. Again, the 
doctrine of the endless turning of the spheres, which “ end 
where they begin,” in the words of “The Shepherd,” 
is shown in the great fourth year festival of Hep-Tep or 
“ Completion-Beginning,” when “ the revolution and the 
rotation of our planet were simultaneously completed 
and begun afresh.” 8 


THE TEMPLES OF INITIATION 


That the ancient temples of initiation in Egypt were 
models of the Sophia Above, or of the “ Heavenly 
Jerusalem,” to use a Jewish Gnostic term, or, in other 
words, of the Type of the world-building, we may well 
believe. Thus itis with interest that we read the re- 
marks of Adams on the temple of Denderah (or Annu), 
rebuilt several times according to the ancient plans, 
and an important centre of the mystery-cultus. The 
temple was dedicated to Hat-Hor, whose ancient title 
was the Virgin-Mother. 

“ In the centre of the temple is the Hall of the Altar, 
with entrances opening east and west; and beyond it 
lies the great hall of the temple entitled the Hall of 


1 Op. ctt., p. 36. 2 Op. cit., p. 153. 3 Op. cit., p. 37. 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 75 


the Child in his Cradle, from whence access is obtained 
to the secret and sealed shrine entered once a year by 
the high priest, on the night of mid-summer.”! 

There were also various other halls and chambers 
each having a distinctive name, “bearing reference, for 
the most part, to the Mysteries of the Light and of a 
divine Birth.” We have such names as: Hall of the 
Golden Rays, Chamber of Gold, Chamber of Birth, 
Dwelling of the Golden One, Chamber of Flames. 

Now as the famous planisphere of Denderah—a wall- 
painting transferred bodily from the temple to Paris, 
early in the last century—‘“ contains the northern and 
southern points, we are enabled to correlate the parts 
of that picture with the various parts of the temple, 
and thereby to discover a striking correspondence 
between the different parts of the inscription and the 
titles of the chambers and halls occupying relative 
positions.” * 

Thus we have in the planisphere corresponding to 
the halls and chambers such names as: Horus, the 
Entrance of the Golden Heavens, the Golden Heaven 
of Isis, Horizon of Light, Palace Chamber of Supreme 
Light, Heavenly Flame of Burning Gold. “And as 
the chief hall of the temple was the Hall of the Child 
in his Cradle, so the chief representation on the plani- 
sphere is the holy Mother with the divine Child in her 
arms.” 


THE MYSTERY OF THE BrrtH or Horvs. 


Now the great mystery of Egypt was the second 
birth, the “ Birth of Horus.” In “The Virgin of the 
World,” a long fragment of the lost Trismegistic 
treatise, “The Sacred Book,” preserved by Stobeus, 
Isis says to Horus: I will not tell of this birth; I 


1 Op. cit., p. 71. 2 Op. cit. p. 75. 


76 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


must not, mighty Horus, reveal the origin of thy race, 
lest men should in the future know the generation of 
the Gods. Of the nature of this rebirth we are familiar 
from our treatises. But in spite of such clear indica- 
tions the mystery of the Golden Horus has not yet 
been revealed. 

In another passage from the same book Isis declares 
that the sovereignty or kingship of philosophy is in the 
hands of Harnebeschenis. This transliterated Egyptian 
name is given by Pietschmann?! as originally either 
Hor neb en xennu (Horus the Lord of Xennu), or as 
Hor nub en yennu (the Golden Horus of Xennu). His 
hieroglyph was the golden hawk, who flies nearest the 
sun, and gazes upon it with unwinking eyes, a fit 
symbol for the new-born, the “man” illuminate. | 

Indeed, says Adams, “ throughout the sacred writings 
of Egypt, there is no doctrine of which more frequent 
mention is made than that of a divine birth.” ? 

In what circle of ideas to place the Birth of ‘Horus 
the theosophical student may perhaps glean by reversing 
the stages given in the following interesting passage of 
our author: 

“In the Teaching of Egypt, around the radiant being, 
which in its regenerate life could assimilate itself to 
the glory of the Godhead, was formed the ‘ khaibit,’ or 
luminous atmosphere, consisting of a series of ethereal 
envelopes, at once shading and diffusing its flaming 
lustre, as the earth’s atmosphere shades and diffuses 
the solar rays. And at each successive transformation 
(Ritual, Ixxvii—lxxxvii.) it descended nearer to the moral 
[? normal] conditions of humanity. From the form of 
the golden hawk, the semblance of the absolute divine 
substance of the one eternal self-existent being, it 
passes to the ‘Lord of Time, the image of the Creator, 

1 Op. cit., p. 44. 2 Op. cit., p. 89. 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 77 


since with the creation time began. Presently it 
assumes the form of a lily, the vignette in the Ritual 
representing the head of Osiris enshrined in that flower ; 
the Godhead manifested in the flesh coming forth from 
immaculate purity. ‘I am the pure lily, we read, 
‘coming forth from the lily of light. I am the source 
of illumination and the channel of the breath of 
immortal beauty. I bring the messages; Horus 
accomplishes them.’ Later the soul passes into the 
form of the wreus, ‘the soul of the earth.’ 

And finally it assumes the semblance of a crocodile ; 
becoming subject, that is, to the passions of humanity. 
For the human passions, being part of the nature 
wherein man was originally created, are not intrinsically 
evil but only become evil when insubordinate to the 
soul,” } 


“THe Book OF THE MASTER” 


And not only was the Deity worshipped as the Source 
of Light and Life, but also as the Fount of Love. “I 
am the Fount of Joy,” says the Creator in the Ritual, 
and when the Atf-crown of illumination is set upon the 
head of the triumphant candidate after accomplishing 
the “ Passage of the Sun,” as referred to above, the 
hymn proclaims that “north and south of that crown 
is Love.”? Into this Love the catechumen was initiated 
from the Secret Scroll, whose name is thus given in 
one of the copies: “This Book is the Greatest of 
Mysteries. Do not let the eye of anyone look upon it 
—that were an abomination. ‘The Book of the Master 
of the Secret House’ is its name.” ® 

1 Op, cit., pp. 163, 164, 2 Op. cit., p. 95. 

3 Op. cit., p. 96. The title seems to be found only in the 


latest recension of the twenty-sixth Saite dynasty—the time of 
our King Ammon—but certainly no better one can be suggested. 


78 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


The whole conception of the doctrine exposed in its 
chapters is instruction in Light and Life. 

But are we to suppose that the majority were really 
instructed in this wisdom ?—for we find it customary to 
wrap up some chapters of this Secret Scroll with almost 
every mummy. By no means. It seems to me that 
there are at least three phases in the use of this scrip- 
ture, and in the process of degeneration from knowledge 
to superstition which can be so clearly traced in the 
history of Egypt. First there was the real instruction, 
followed by initiation while living; secondly, there 
was the recitation of the instruction over the uninitiated 
dead to aid the soul of the departed in the middle 
passage; and thirdly, there was the burying a chapter 
or series of chapters of the Book of the Master as a 
talisman to protect the defunct, when in far later 
times the true meaning of the words written in the 
sacred characters had been lost, though they were 
still “superstitiously ” regarded as magical “words of 
power.” 

The recitation of some of the chapters over the dead 
body of the uninitiated, however, is not to be set down 
as a useless “superstition,” but was a very efficacious 
form of “ prayers for the dead.” After a man’s decease 
he was in conscious contact with the unseen world, 
even though he may have been sceptical of its existence, 
or at any rate unfit to be taught its real nature, prior 
to his decease. But after the soul was freed from the 
prison of the body, even the uninitiated was in a con- 
dition to be instructed on the nature of the path he 
then perforce must travel. But as he could not even 
then properly pronounce the “words” of the sacred 
tongue, the initiated priest recited or chanted the 
passages. 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 79 


THe STEPS OF THE PATH 


“For the doctrine contained in those mystic writings 
was nothing else than an account of the Path pursued 
by the Just when, the bonds of the flesh being loosed, 
he passed through stage after stage of spiritual growth 
—the Entrance on Light, the Instruction in Wisdom, 
the Second Birth of the Soul, the Instruction in the 
Well of Life, the Ordeal of Fire, and the Justification 
in Judgment ; until, illumined in the secret Truth and 
adorned with the jewels of Immortality, he became 
indissolubly united with Him whose name, says the 
Egyptian Ritual, is Light, Great Creator.”? 

It should, however, be remembered that this must 
not be taken in its absolute sense even for the initiate, 
much less for the uninitiated. For even in the mystic 
schools themselves, as we may see from our treatises, 
there were three modes in which knowledge could be 
communicated—* By simple instruction, by distant 
vision, or by personal participation.”? For indeed 
there were many phases of being, many steps of the 
great ladder, each in ever greater fullness embracing 
the stages mentioned, each a reflection or copy of a 
higher phase, 

Thus, for example, “the solemn address, described in 
the Sai-an-Sinsin, of the ‘Gods in the House of Osiris,’ 
followed by the response of the ‘Gods in the House of 
Glory ’—the joyous song of the holy departed who stand 
victorious before the judgment-seat, echoed triumph- 
antly by the inner chorus of their beloved who have 
gone before them into the fullness of life”*—must be 
taken as indicative of several stages. Such, for instance, 
as the normal union of the man’s consciousness with that 

1 Op. cit., pp. 103, 104. 
2 Op. cit., p. 148. 8 Op. cit. p. 120, 


80 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


of his higher ego, after exhausting his spiritual aspira- 
tions in the intermediate heaven-world—this is the 
joining the “ those-that-are” of “ The Shepherd ” treatise, 
in other words, the harvest of those past lives of his 
that are worthy of immortality; or again the still 
higher union of the initiated with the “pure mind”; 
or again the still sublimer union of the Master with the 
nirvanic consciousness; and so on perchance to still 
greater Glories, 

Thus we are told that the new twice-born, on his 
initiation, “clothed in power and crowned with light, 
traverses the abodes or scenes of his former weakness, 
there to discern, by his own enlightened perception, 
how it is ‘ Osiris who satisfies the balance of Him who 
rules the heavens’; to exert in its supernal freedom 
his creative will, now the lord, not the slave of the 
senses; and to rejoice in the just suffering which 
wrought his Illumination and Mastery.” } 

But higher and still higher he has yet to soar beyond 
earth and planets and even beyond the sun, “across the 
awful chasms of the unfathomable depths to far-off 
Sothis, the Land of Eternal Dawn, to the Ante-chamber 
of the Infinite Morning.” ? 


AN ILLUMINATIVE STUDY 


Many other passages of great beauty and deep 
interest could we quote from the pages of Marsham 
Adams’ illuminative study, but enough has been said 
for our purpose. The Wisdom of Egypt was the main 
source of our treatises without a doubt. Even if only 
one-hundredth part of what our author writes were the 
truth, our case would be established; and if Egypt did 
not teach this Wisdom, then we must perforce bow 


1 Op. cit., p. 185. 2 Op. cit., p. 186. 


THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM 81 


down before Mr Adams as the inventor of one of the 
most grandiose religions of the universe. But the 
student of inner nature knows that it is not an inven- 
tion, and though, if he be a scholar at the same time, 
he cannot but regret that Mr Adams has omitted his 
references, he must leave the critics to one or other of 
the horns of the dilemma; they must either declare 
that our author has invented it all and pay homage to 
what in that case would be his sublime genius, or admit 
that the ancient texts themselves have inspired Mr 
Adams with these ideas. And if this be a foretaste of 
what Egypt has preserved for us, what may not the 
future reveal to continued study and sympathetic 
interpretation ! 


VOL. 1. 6 


lV 


THE POPULAR THEURGIC HERMES-CULT IN 
THE GREEK MAGIC PAPYRI 


THE “ RELIGION OF HERMES” 


THaT at one period the “ Religion of Hermes” was not 
only widely spread, but practically supreme, in popular 
Hellenistic circles, may be seen from a study of the 
texts of the numerous magic papyri which have been 
preserved, and made accessible to us by the industry 
of such immensely laborious scholars as Leemans, 
Dieterich, Wessely, and Kenyon. 

The Greek Hermes prayers, as with many others of 
a similar nature, are manifestly overworkings of more 
ancient types, and, as we might expect, are of a strongly 
syncretistic nature. In them we can distinguish in 
popular forms, based on the ancient traditions of 
Egyptian magic, most interesting shadows of the philo- 
sophic and theosophic ideas which our Trismegistic 
literature has set forth for us in the clear light of 
dignified simplicity. 

But just as we now know that the once so-called 
“Gnostic,” Abraxas and Abraxoid amulets, gems, and 
rings pertained to the general popular magical religion 
and had nothing to do with the Gnosis proper, so we 
may be sure that the circles of high mysticism, who 


refused to offer to God even so pure a sacrifice as 
82 


THE POPULAR THEURGIC HERMES-CULT 83 


the burnt offering of incense, and deemed naught 
worthy of Him, short of the “ prayers and praises of 
the mind,” had nothing directly to do with the 
popular Hermes prayers, least of all with the invoca- 
tory rites of popular theurgy, and phylactery or amulet 
consecration. 

Nevertheless, there is much of interest for us in these 
invocations, and much that can throw side-lights on the 
higher teaching and practice which transformed all 
external rites into the discipline of inner spiritual 
experience. 

The following prayers, which, as far as I know, have 
not been previously translated, are rendered from the 
most recently revised texts of Reitzenstein, who has 
omitted the magic names, and emended the previous 
editions, I cannot but think, however, that these texts 
might be submitted to a more searching analysis than 
has yet been accorded them. They seem to present 
somewhat similar phenomena to the recensions of the 
Book of the Dead; that is to say, fragments of 
material from the tradition of a greater past have been 
adapted and overworked for the needs of a lesser age. 
Indeed, the whole effort of the Trismegistic schools 
seems to have been to restore the memory of that 
greater past; it had been forgotten, and its dim record 
had become a superstition instead of a living faith, a 
degenerate magic instead of a potent theurgy. The 
theurgy of our prayers is that of dwarfs; the theurgy 
of the past was believed to have been that of 
giants. 


84 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


I. AN INVOCATION TO HERMES AS THE Goop MinpD! 


[Revised text, R. 15-18 ; Leemans (C.), Papyrt Grac, Mus. Ant. 
Pub. Lug. Bat, (Leyden, 1885), II. 141, 14 ff., and V. 27, 27 ff. ; 
Dieterich (A.), Abraxas (Leipzig, 1891), 195, 4 ff. ; and Jahrbiicher 
f. class. Phil.,'Suppl. XVI. 808 ff. (Papyrus Mag. Mus. Lug. Bat.).] 


1. Come unto me, O thou of the four winds,’ al- 
mighty one,® who breathest spirit into men to give 
them life; 

2. Whose name is hidden, and beyond the power of 
men to speak ;* no prophet [even] can pronounce it; yea, 
even daimons, when they hear thy name, are fearful ! 

3. O thou, whose tireless eyes are sun and moon,5— 
[eyes] that shine in the pupils ® of the eyes of men! 

4. O thou, who hast the heaven for head, ether for 
body, [and] earth for feet, and for the water round thee 
ocean’s deep!’ Thou the Good Daimon art, who art 
the sire of all things good, and nurse of the whole world.® 

5. Thy everlasting revelling-place ® is set above. 

6. Thine the good emanations’ of the stars,—those 
daimons, fortunes, and those fates by whom are given 


1 T have supplied the titles. 

2 Perhaps originally spirits or breaths. 

3 mravroxpdtwp, used of Hermes, Anth. P., append., 282. 

* Compare Lactantius, i. 6 (Frag. II.); and especially iv. 7 
(Frag. VI.). 

5 The “eyes and light of Horus,” according to Plutarch, De Js. 
et Os., lii. ; mystically, the higher and lower “ ego” and much else. 

& éy rais xdpats—compare the dissertation on the meaning of the 
title of our treatise generally translated “Virgin (xépn) of the 
World,” in the commentary thereto. 

7 Sc. the Ocean of Space, the “ Great Green” of the Ritual. 

8 That is, father-mother of the universe. 

9 xwpaorhpiov—that is, heaven. See vii. 3 below. 

10 arédpporac—or personified influences. See Plutarch, De Is. et 
Os., xxxviii., liii., lviii.; and especially Pistis Sophia, where it 
occurs over and over again. Compare also K. K.,1; Stob., p. 405, 
17 (W.). 


THE POPULAR THEURGIC HERMES-CULT 85 


wealth, good blend [of nature],’ and good children, good 
fortune, and good burial. For thou art lord of life,— 

7. Thou who art king of heavens and earth and all 
that dwell in them ; 

8. Whose Thighteoumions is never put away ; ; whose 
Muses hymn thy glorious name; whom the eight 
Wardens guard,—thou the possessor of the Truth? pure 
of all lie! 

9. Thy Name and Spirit rest upon the good.® 

10. O mayst thou come into my mind and heart for 
all the length of my life’s days, and bring unto 
accomplishment all things my soul desires! 

11. For thou art I, and I am thous Whate’er I 
speak, may it for ever be; for that I have thy Name® 
to guard me in my heart.® 


1 cixepacta—referring apparently to the composition of 
“body” and “soul.” 

2 That is, the Pleroma or A®on (see vi. 9 below). Reitzen- 
stein (p. 18) says rightly, as we have seen, that Egyptologists 
have long recognised that the God here identified with Agatho- 
daimon was originally the Hermes or Thoth of Hermopolis 
Magna, Lord of the Eight Wardens (the Ogdoad), symbolised by 
apes, hymned by the Muses (? the Nine or Ennead), and spouse 
of Isis-Righteousness (cf. Plut., De Is. et Os., iii.). 

3 See 13 below. 

4 Compare the extra-canonical logos: “I stood on a lofty 
mountain and saw a gigantic man, and another, a dwarf; and I 
heard as it were a voice of thunder, and drew nigh for to hear ; 
and He spake unto me and said: I am thou, and thou art I; 
and wheresoever thou mayest be lam there. In all am I scattered 
[that is, the Logos as seed or “members” ], and whencesoever thou 
willest, thou gatherest Me; and gathering Me, thou gatherest 
Thyself.” (From the Gospel of Eve, quoted by Epiphanius, Hwres., 
xxvi. 3.) Of. 11. 7. 

5 In the Egyptian sense—that is, thy true “person” or 
“presence.” See R. 17, n. 6, for many references to this funda- 
mental concept of Egyptian religion, 

6 pvaaxrhpiov—lit., as a phylactery or amulet. See R. 18, n. 8, 
for Egyptian origin of Jewish phylacteries. 


86 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


12. And every serpent! roused shall have no power 
o'er me, nor shall I be opposed by any spirit, or 
daimonial power, or any plague, or any of the evils in 
the Unseen World ;* for that I have thy Name within 
my soul. 

13. Thee I invoke; come unto me, Good, altogether 
good, [come] to the good—thou whom no magic can 
enchant, no magic can control, who givest me good 
health, security,> good store, good fame, victory, [and] 
strength, and cheerful countenance ! © 

14, Cast down the eyes of all who are against me, 
and give me grace on all my deeds!’ 


II. AN INVOCATION TO LorD HERMES 


[Revised and restored text, stripped of later overworkings, R. 
20, 21. Wessely (C.), Denkschriften der kaiserlichen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften, “‘ Neue griechische Zauberpapyri” (Vienna, 1893), 
vol, xlii. p, 55; Kenyon (F. G.), Greek a i in the British 
Museum (London, 1893), i. 116.] 


1. Come unto me, Lord Hermes, even as into women’s 
wombs [come] babes !® 

2. Come unto me, Lord Hermes, who dost collect the 
food of gods and men!® 

3. Lord Hermes, come to me, and give me grace, 


1 Spat —here the symbol of any hostile elemental force. 
Compare K. K.,—Stob., 402, 22 (W.). 

«ad “Atdou, 
See 9 above. 
&Bdoravros, aBdoKxayros, 
owrnplay, or salvation. 

6 See 11. 2 below. 

7 Compare with this prayer for the descent of the Mind into 
the heart, the ascent of the man into the Mind of C. H., xiii. 
(xiii.) 3. 

8 This is an echo of spiritual rebirth or regeneration. 

® In its highest sense the heavenly food, or wisdom, the “super- 
substantial bread,” or “ bread of life.” 


oo - OO we 


THE POPULAR THEURGIC HERMES-CULT 87 


{and} food, [and] victory, [and] health and happiness, 
and cheerful countenance,! beauty and powers in sight 
of all! 

4. I know thy Name that shineth forth in heaven; 
I know thy forms? as well; I know thy tree;* I know 


| thy wood * as well. 


5. I know thee, Hermes, who thou art, and whence 
thou art, and what thy city is. 

6. I know thy names in the Egyptian tongue,® and 
thy true name as it is written on the holy tablet in the 
holy place at Hermes’ city, where thou dost have thy birth. 

7. I know thee, Hermes, and thou [knowest] me; 
[and] I am thou, and thou art I.® 

8. Come unto me; fulfil all that I crave; be favour- 
able to me together with good fortune and the blessing 
of the Good.’ 


III. An Invocation To Lorp HERMES 


[Revised and restored text, R.21. It is worked in with the 
preceding, but is of later date.] 


1. Come unto me, Lord Hermes, O thou of many 
names, who know’st the secrets hidden both beneath 
the poles [of heaven] and underneath the earth! 


1 érappodiclay rpooérov, See I. 13 above. 

2 The symbols of which are: the ibis in the east, ape in the 
west, the serpent in the north, the wolf (or jackal) in the south. 
So says the overworking of the text; but perhaps wolf should 
rather be dog. 

3 The terebinth, or turpentine palm. Compare this with the 
story of Terebinthus, from whose four Books Manes is said, in 
the Acta Archelat, to have derived his system. 

4 The ebony ; perhaps symbolic of the “dark” wisdom, the 
initiation “in the black” of the K. K. Fragments. 

5 7d BapBapixa dvéuara—lit., barbarous, that is, non-Greek. 

OG. Lik 

7 Lit., with Agathodaimon; compare civ %¢—“with God’s 
blessing.” 


88 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


2. Come unto me, Lord Hermes, thou benefactor, who 
doest good to all the world! 

3. Give ear to me, [and] give me grace with all that 
are on earth; open for me the hands of all that give 
like thee ;' [and] make them give me what their hands 
contain ! 

4, Even as Horus? if e’er he called on thee, O 
greatest of all gods, in every trial, in every space, 
’gainst gods, and men, and daimones, and things that 
live in water and on earth,—had grace and riches with 
gods, and men, and every living thing beneath the 
earth ;—so let me, too, who call on thee! So give 
me grace, form, beauty ! 

6. Hear me, O Hermes, doer of good deeds, thou 
the inventor of [all] incantations? speak me good 
words ! 4 


7. Hear me, O Hermes, for I have done all things 
[that I should do] for thy black dog-ape,> lord of the 
nether ones! 


8. O, soften all [towards me], and give me might 


1 guvdwxdvrwv—a drat rAcySuevov—3okw (Sidwut) may be com- 
pared with orhxw (iornu:). The image may be taken from the 
well-known symbolical representation of the sun sending forth 
rays, each furnished with a hand for giving and blessing, especially 
in the frescoes of the Atem-cult period. Of. K. K., 11 and 31. 

2 In the mystery-myth. . 

3 Orig., medicines or philtres, 

4 eddiddextos yevod—a unique and inelegant expression in Greek, 
and of uncertain translation into English. 

5 This appears here to refer to Anubis, the “dog” of Hades, or 
the “ death-genius,” the attendant on Thoth. “Black” is lit. 
“Ethiopian.” But compare in Pistis Sophia, 367, ‘ Aithiopic 
Ariouth,” a ruler among the infernal daimonials, who is “ entirely 
black.” The Ethiopians were famous for their sorcery and black 
magic. They were the traditional opponents of the “white 
magicians” of Egypt. Compare “ Hor, son of the Negress” in the 
“Second Story of Khamuas,” in Griffith’s (F. Ll.) Stories of the 
High Priests of Memphis (Oxford, 1900), pp. 51 ff. 


THE POPULAR THEURGIC HERMES-CULT 89 


[and] form,! and let them give me gold, and silver [too], 
and food of every kind continually. 

9. Preserve me evermore for the eternity from spells, 
deceits, and witchery of every kind, from evil tongues, 
from every check and every enmity of gods and 
men! : 

10. Give unto me grace, victory, success, and satis- 
faction ! 

11. For thou art I, and I am thou; thy Name 
is mine, and mine is thine; for that I am thy 
likeness.” 

12. Whatever shall befall me in this year, or month, 
or day, or hour,—it shall befall the Mighty God, whose 
symbol is upon the holy vessel’s prow.* 


1 This is not necessarily a prayer for physical form and the rest, 
but a prayer that the subtle ka of the man, the plastic soul- 
substance, may take a form of power and beauty, in the unseen 
world. 

2 ¢f$wdov, or image or double. The theurgist is endeavouring 
to identify his ka with that of the god. It was with his ka also, 
presumably, that the consecrated statue of the god was “animated.” 
Compare the exposition of this theory as given in P. S. A., and 
the “image” or “likeness of God ” in Lactantius, ii. 10. Accord- 
ing to the Egyptians, man possessed : (1) a physical body (khat) ; 
(2) a soul (ba); (3) a heart (ab); (4) a double (ka); (5) an 
intelligence (chu) ; (6) a power (sekhem) ; (7) a shadow (khatbit) ; (8) 
a spiritual body (sah [sic]) ; (9) a name (ren). See Budge, Gods of 
the Egyptians, ii. 299, 300. These are, of course, not arranged in 
any natural order or in a scientific distribution. The precise 
meaning of most of these terms is not known. Budge (op. cit., i. 
163, 164), however, writes: “ Related intimately to the body, but 
with undefined functions, as far as we can discover, was the sekhem, 
a word which has been translated ‘ power,’ and ‘form,’ and even 
‘ vital force’ ; finally the glorified body, to which had been united 
the soul, and spirit and power, and name of the deceased, had its 
abode in heaven. This new body of the deceased in heaven was 
called shu.” 

3 Thoth and Maat are represented as sitting on either side of 
Ra in his boat. 


90 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


IV. An Invocation to THotH as LoGos 


[Revised text, R. 22. Leemans, op. cit., II. 103, 7; Dieterich, 
op. cit., 189.] 

1. Thee I invoke alone, thou who alone in all the 
world imposest order upon gods and men,! who dost 
transform thyself in holy forms,? making to be from 
things that are not, and from the things that are 
making the not to be. 

2. O holy Thoth,’ the true sight of whose face none 
of the gods endures! 

3. Make me to be in every creature’s name*—wolf, 
dog, [or] lion, fire, tree, [or] vulture,> wall,6 [or] water,’ 
or what thou will’st, for thou art able [so to do]. 


V. AN INVOCATION TO HERMES AS THE SPIRITUAL LIGHT 


[Revised text, R. 22,23, Leemans, ibid., II. 87, 24 ; Dieterich, 
ibid., 176, 1.] 


1. Thee I invoke who hast created all, who dost 
transcend the whole, the self-begotten God, who seest 
all and hearest all, but who art seen by none. 

2. For thou didst give the sun his glory and all 
might, the moon her increase and her decrease, and 
[unto both] their ordained course. Though thou didst 
not diminish aught the [powers of] darkness, the still 


1 That is, Hermes as the cosmic Logos. 

2 Thoth changes his form in every heaven-space or sphere. 
Compare C. H., i. 13; and also the same idea in the descent of 
the Christos in a number of Gnostic systems, where the Saviour 
and King conceals himself in the forms of his servants in every 
phase of his descent. Cf. also C. H., xi. (xii.) 16. 

3 6a. 

4 That is, essence, or may be type. 

5 Presumably a symbol for air. 

6 Presumably a symbol for earth, 

7 Compare C. H., xi. (xii.) 20; and P. S. A., vi. 


THE POPULAR THEURGIC HERMES-CULT 91 


more ancient [than the sun and moon], thou mad’st 
them equal [with it]. 

3. For when thou didst shine forth, Cosmos came 
into being, and light appeared, and all things were 
dispensed through thee; wherefore they all are under 
thee. 

4. O thou, whose actual form none of the gods can 
see, who dost transform thyself into them all in visions 
[that men see], O thou Eternity of the eternity.’ 

5. Thee I invoke, O Lord, that thy true form may 
manifest to me, for that I am in servitude below thy 
world,’ slave to thy angel and unto thy fear.* 

6. Through thee the pole and earth are fixed. 

7. Thee I invoke, O Lord, e’en as the gods whom 
thou hast made to shine, that they may have their 
power. ; 


The above prayers afford us some striking examples 
of the popular Hellenistic form of the Hermes religion,° 


1 With the Egyptians, Darkness was the mystery of all 
mysteries, As Damascius (On First Principles) says: “Of the 
first principle the Egyptians said nothing ; but characterised it 
as a darkness beyond all intellectual conception, a thrice unknown 
Darkness” (cxéros &yvworov tpls todro éemidnul(oyvres). See my 
Orpheus (London, 1896), p. 93, and for “Night,” pp. 154 and 
170 ff. Perhaps this may again give some clue to the initiation 
“in the black” of the K. K. excerpt. The “dark wisdom” was 
the hidden of the hidden. : 

2 alay alévos. In another hymn, Hermes, as Logos, is called 
“Cosmos of cosmos” (R. 23, n. 1)—that is, the spiritual world or 
order. 

3 That is the spiritual cosmos, or cosmos of Mind. 

* Compare Isaiah xlv. 7: “I form the light and create dark- 
ness: I make peace and create evil: I the Lord do all these 
things.” Of. 0, H.,i. 23, “the avenging daimon”; and dbid., 15, 
“Within the Harmony he hath become a slave,” 

5 Called in the Trismegistic literature the “Religion of the 
Mind” (Mentis religto). See P. 8. A., xxv. 


92 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


in its theurgic phase. In it Hermes is regarded as the 
Mind?! or Logos. The Mind is invoked to enter the 
mind and heart (I, 10).2 With the shining out of the 
Mind, the Spiritual or Intelligible Light shines forth in 
the world and man (v. 3). The Mind is thus the guide 
of souls.’ He is also identified with the Good Daimon 
(of whom Chnuphis or Horus are variants), with the 
Great Ocean, the Heaven-Space or Celestial Nile, the 
Great Green, the Light, the Aton. 

In connection with the above invocations Reitzenstein 
gives the text of a very interesting ritual of lower theurgy, 
or rite of the sacred flame, which he characterises by the 
term “mystery of lychnomancy or lamp-magic.” This 
is the lower side of such high vision as is referred to in 
“The Shepherd of Men” treatise and in the rite de- 
scribed in the following passage of the Pistis Sophia, 
272, 373: 

“Jesus said unto his disciples: Come unto me! And 


1 Compare the cosmogony in Dieterich, Abrawas, 17, 43: 
“Through the Bitterness of God, there appeared Mind. . . that 
restrains the heart, and was called Hermes,” With this peculiar 
phrase “ Bitterness of God” compare the “ Bitter Chaos” of the 
hymn at the end of the J. source of the Naassene Document in 
“The Myth of Man” chapter; also the “ Bitter Water” or 
Chaos of the Sethian System (Hipp., Philos., v. 19); so also Julian, 
in Oration V., who writes: “The oracles of the gods declare that 
through purification not only our soul but also our bodies are 
judged worthy of being greatly helped and preserved, for it is 
said in them that ‘the mortal vesture of bitter matter is pre- 
served,” Is it thus possible that the “Bitterness” of Jacob 
Béhme may be a reminiscence of the ancient Gnosis ? 

2 For pure Egyptian parallels see R. 24, n. 1. 

3 See the theogony in Dieterich, op. cit., 18, 75: “And the 
soul came into being. And God said: ‘Thou shalt move all 
things . . . Hermes guiding thee.’” Compare (C. H., x. (xi.) 21: 
“ But on the pious soul the Mind doth mount, and guide it to 
the Gnosis’ light ;” also xii. (xiii.) 12, ix, (x.) 10, iv. (v.) 11, vii, 
(viii.) 2. 


ai 


THE POPULAR THEURGIC HERMES-CULT 93 


they came unto him. He turned to the four quarters 
of the world, and spake the Great Name over their heads, 
and blessed them, and breathed on their eyes. 

“Jesus said unto them: Look, see what ye may see! 

“ And lifting up their eyes they saw a great Light, 
exceeding vast, which no dweller on earth could 
describe, 

“He said to them again: Gaze into the Light, and 
see what ye may see! 

“They said: We see fire and water, and wine and 
blood.” 


VI. THe Mystic Rite oF THE FLAME 


[Revised text, R. 25-27. Wessely, op. cit., “ Griechische zauber- 
papyrus von Paris und London” (Vienna, 1888), 68, 930 ff.] 


(a) Invocation to the Light * 


1. I invoke thee, O God, the living one,? who dost 
show forth thy splendour in the fire, thou unseen 
Father of the Light!* Pour forth thy strength; 
awake thy daimon, and come down into this fire; 
inspire it with [thy] holy spirit; show me thy might, 
and let the house of the almighty God, which is within 
this light, be opened for me! Let there be light,— 


1! These rubrics I have added, following the example of Reitzen- 
stein, but not his wording. 

* Compare the expression “Jesus the living [one]” found 
frequently in the Introduction to the “ First Book of Ieou” (Carl 
Schmidt, Gnostische Schriften in koptischer Sprache aus dem Codex 
Brucianus (Leipzig, 1892), 142-145—reprinted with his recent 
translation of the Pistis Sophia in Band I. of his Koptisch gnostische 
Schriften (Leipzig, 1905); and also the Preface to the newest 
found logot: “These are the . . . words which Jesus, the living 
{one], spake” (Grenfell and Hunt, New Sayings of Jesus, London, 
1904). 

3 Compare in the same writings the oft-repeated “ Father of all 
fatherhood, Boundless Light.” 


94 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


[thy] breadth-depth-length-height-ray ;! and let the 
Lord, the [God] within, shine forth! 


(6) A Stronger Form to be used if the Flame dies down 


2. I adjure thee, O Light, holy ray, breadth-depth- 
length-height-ray, by the holy names which I have 
uttered, and am now about to speak... abide with 
me in this same hour, until I have besought thy God, 
and learnt about the things that I desire! 


(c) The Theagogy or Invocation of the God proper 


3. Thee I invoke, thou mightiest God and Master 
. . . thou who enlightenest all and pour’st thy rays by 
means of thine own power on all the world, O God of 
gods ! 

' 4. O Word (Logos) that orderest night and day, who 
guid’st the ship? and hold’st the helm, thou dragon- 
slayer, Good Holy Daimon . .. ! 

5. To whom the East and West give praise as thou 
dost rise and set, thou who art blest by all the gods, 
angels, and daimones ! 

6. Come, show thyself to me, O God of gods .. . ! 

7. Enter, make manifest thyself to me,O Lord; for I 
invoke as the three apes invoke thee—who symbol-wise 
name forth thy holy Name. 


1 See Dieterich, Jahrb. f. Phil., Suppl., xvi. 802, 171, and 
706. Compare also Ephes. iii. 18, and the Valentinian interpreta- 
tion of the terms in this text as given by Hippolytus, Philos., vi. 
34 (Dunker and Schneidewin, p. 248) ; also the interpretation of 
the Light Hymn in Pistis Sophia, 146, where the “height” is 
identified with the “ home” of the Light. 

2 The magic names of power are omitted, as in the other prayers, 

8 Horus is often represented as pilot of the sun-ship in its 
voyage across the ocean of space, the “‘ Great Green.” 

* The dragon here undoubtedly meaning darkness. Cf. C. H.,i. 4. 


~ 


THE POPULAR THEURGIC HERMES-CULT 95 


8. In thy ape-form? enter, appear to me, O Lord; 
for I name forth thy mightiest names ! 

9. O thou who: hast thy throne about the height of 
cosmos,? and judgest all, encircled with the sphere of 
Surety and Truth !® 

10. Enter, appear to me, O Lord, for that I was 
before the fire and snow, and shall be after [them] ; 

11. I am the one who has been born from heaven.* 

12. Enter, appear to me, O Lord of mighty names, 
whom all have in their hearts,° who dost burst open 
rocks,* and mak’st the names of gods to move! 

13. Enter, appear to me, O Lord, who hast thy power 
and strength in fire, who hast thy throne within the 
seven poles,’ 


1 Gs xvvonépaaros, Can it be possible that behind this strange 
symbolism there may once have been some such idea as this—that 
as the ape is to man, so was this great elemental to the God ? 

2 Lit., art seated on the head of cosmos, 

3 That is the Eternity or Aon, called elsewhere the Pleroma 
or “fullness of grace,” and identified with Agathodaimon (see 
prayer, R. 30). See also Wessely, op. cit., 185 (R. 362) ; and com- 
pare John i, 14, “full of grace and truth”; and 16, “Of his 
fullness have we received, and grace for grace.” 

4 The regenerate, or spirit-born—that is of “ virgin-birth” or the 
“birth of Horus.” But compare the declaration of the soul on its 
entrance into the unseen world after death, as given on an inscrip- 
tion found in the tomb of an Orphic or Pythagorean initiate, at 
Petilia, in what was once Magna Grecia: “Of Earth and starry 
Heaven child am I; my race is of the Heavens!” (See Inser. 
Gr. Sicilie et Italie, 638; and my “Notes on the Eleusinian 
Mysteries,” Theosophical Review, xxii. 317.) 

6 These are the logot hidden in the hearts of all. 

8 This may be merely a figurative expression in praise of the 
might that can not only dissolve the most stable things on earth, 
but also set in motion the centre of stability of spiritual essences ; 
or it may refer to the idea of the “God born from the rock,” 
which is most familiar to us from the Mithriac mystery-tradition, 
where the rock is said to symbolise in physics the “ firmament,” 
which was thought of as solid or rigid by the ancients. 

7 That is, the seven cosmic spheres. 


96 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


14, And on thy head a golden crown, and in thy 
hand a staff. . .! by which thou sendest forth the gods ! 

15. Enter, O Lord, and give me answer with thy 
holy voice, that I may clearly hear and truthfully about 
this thing! 


(d) A Stronger Form of Adjuration <f (c) fails 


16. He doth enjoin thee, He the great living God, 
who is for the eternities of the eternities, the shaker 
and the thunderer, who doth create each soul and every 
birth. Enter, appear to me, O Lord, joyous, benignant, 
gentle, glorious, free from all wrath; for I adjure thee 
by the Lord [of all]! 


(e) The Greeting when the Presence of the God 
is manifested 


17. Hail Lord, O God of gods, thou benefactor .. . ! 
Hail to thy glories* ever more, O Lord! 


(f) The Farewell to the God 


18. I give thee thanks, O Lord. Depart, O Lord, to 
thine own heavens, thine own realms, and thine own 


1 pexvowny—an untranslatable reading. Is it Egyptian ?—or 
is it intended for peuvdvecay 2 If the latter, it would presumably 
be connected with the Egyptian myth and cult of Memnon (see 
Roscher’s Lexikon, coll. 2661 ff.). The Memnon cult was somehow 
connected with Hermes, for in the ruins of the temple were 
still (at the beginning of the third century) to be seen “ statues 
of Hermes,” according to Philostratus (Vit. Apoll., vi. 4), who 
also (Imag., i. 7) tells us that the Memnon statue was as a lyre 
which was struck by the rod (Ajjxrpor), that is the ray (4 d«ris), 
of the sun. If so, “the rod [of power], by which thou sendest 
forth the gods,” that is thy rays, each god being a ray of the 
spiritual sun, might have the epithet Memnonian applied to it. 
But in our present lack of information, this interpretation 
seems very strained. 

2 8éfa:—here meaning powers. 


THE POPULAR THEURGIC HERMES-CULT 97 


course, preserving me in health, free from all harm, 
free from all-fear of any ka, free from all stripes, and 
all dismay, hearkening to me for all the days of [all] 
my life! 


(9) The Farewell to the Flame 


19. Depart, O holy ray; depart, O fair and holy light 
of highest God! 


In connection with the above, we may also take the 
following ritual-prayer used in the consecration of an 
amulet ring. 


VII. A PRAYER oF CONSECRATION 
[Revised text, R. 28, 29, Wessely, ibid., 84, 1598 ff.] 


1, Thee I invoke, O greatest God, Lord everlasting, 
thou world-ruler, above the world, beneath the world, 
mighty sea-ruler ; 

2. Who shinest forth at dawn, out from the East 
rising for all the world, and setting in the West! 

3. Come unto me, thouwho dost rise from the four 
winds, joyous Good Daimon, for whom the heaven is 
thy revelling-place !? 

4, I call upon thy holy, mighty, hidden names which 
thou dost joy to hear. 

5. When thou dost shine the earth doth sprout 
afresh, the trees bear fruit when thou dost laugh, the 
animals bring forth when thou dost turn to them. 

6. Give glory, honour, grace, fortune and power... ! 

7. Thee I invoke, the great in heaven... ,O 
dazzling Sun, who shed’st thy beams on all the world! 

8. Thou art the mighty serpent, the chief of all the 

1 GvedwrdrAnxtoy, 


2 nwoparrhpiov. Of. 1. 5 above. 
VOL. I. 


98 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


gods,! O thou who dost possess Egypt’s beginning,? and 
the end of all the world! 

9. Thou art the [God] who saileth o’er the ocean; 
thou art the [God] who doth come into sight each day. 

10. O thou who art above the world, and art beneath 
the world, O mighty ruler of the sea, give ear unto my 
voice this day, this night, these holy hours [of thine], 
and through this amulet let that be done for which I 
consecrate it! 


1 The serpent was a symbol of the Logos, and this is the idea 
underlying the so-called Ophite systems of the Gnosis, 

? This refers to the first nome of Upper Egypt, whose metro- 
polis, Elephantine, was once the chief seat of the popular Agatho- 
daimon cult (R. 29, n. 4). The “world” was thus the Egyptian 
civilised world, beyond which was the darkness of Ethiopia. 


V 


THE MAIN SOURCE OF THE TRISMEGISTIC 
LITERATURE ACCORDING TO MANETHO, 
HIGH PRIEST OF EGYPT 


HERMES AT THE BEGINNING OF THE HELLENISTIC 
PERIOD 


THE more intimate contact of Greek thought and 
philosophy with Egyptian lore and mystic tradition 
began immediately with the brilliant era of the Lagides, 
who gradually made Alexandria the intellectual and 
religious, philosophic and scientific, centre of the 
Hellenistic world. 

Thoth-Hermes, as we have seen, had been for the 
Egyptians from the earliest times the teacher of all 
ancient and hidden wisdom; he was par excellence the 
writer of all sacred scripture and the scribe of the 
gods. We should then naturally expect that his 
dominating influence would play a leading part in the 
new development; and this, indeed, is amply demon- 
strated by the evidence of the religious art of the time, 
which presents us with specimens of statues of the 
Greek type of Hermes, bearing at the same time either 
the feather of truth (the special symbol of Maat) on the 
head, or the papyrus-roll in the hand +—both symbols of 
Thoth in his dual character as revealer and scribe. 


1 R. 3, nn. 1, 2. 
99 


100 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Of the complex nature of the mystic and apocalyptic 
literature that thus came into existence we have very 
distinct testimony.1 In keeping with its Egyptian 
prototype it was all cast in a theological and theo- 
sophical mould, whether it treated of physics, or 
medicine, or astrology. Thus we learn that’Pamphilus, 
the grammarian,? was intimately acquainted with a 
Greek-Egyptian literature dealing with “sacred 
plants” and their virtues as determined by the 
influences of the thirty-six Decans; this lore, he tells 
us, was derived from the “Books ascribed to the 
Egyptian Hermes.” ? 


PETOSIRIS AND NECHEPSO 


Of still greater interest are the Greek fragments of 
Petosiris and Nechepso which have come down to us.4 
These Greek fragments are to be dated at least before 
the end of the second century B.c.,5 and afford us 
striking parallels with our extant Trismegistic literature. 

In them we find the Prophet Petosiris represented 
as the teacher and counsellor of King Nechepso, as 
Asclepius of Ammon in one type of our literature; 
while it is Hermes who reveals the secret wisdom to 
two younger gods, Asclepius and Anubis, as in our 
sermons he does to Asclepius and Tat. 

As to Petosiris himself, Suidas (s.v.) tells us that he 
was an Egyptian philosopher who wrote on comparative 


1 See R. 3-7, to whom I am indebted for the indications. 

2 Of the school of Aristarchus (fl. 280-264), The great Lexicon 
of Pamphilus is supposed by some to have been the basis of that 
of Hesychius. 

3 Apud, Galen, rept arAGy gapu., vi. Procem. (tom. ix. p. 798 K). 

4 See Riess, Philologus Supplem., Fragg. 27-29. 

§ See Kroll, “Aus der Geschichte der Astrologie,” Neue 
Jahrob, f. Phil. u. Péd., vii. 559 ff. 


MAIN SOURCE OF TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 101 


Greek and Egyptian theology, making selections from 
the “Holy Books,” and treating of astrology and the 
Egyptian Mysteries. Moreover, Proclus! tells us that 
Petosiris had an intimate knowledge of every order of 
the Gods and Angels, and refers to a hieratic formula 
of theurgic invocation to the greatest of the goddesses 
(Necessity), for inducing the vision of this Power, and 
the ritual of the manner of addressing her when she 
appeared, as handed on by the same Petosiris. 

The mystical nature of this literature is still more 
clearly shown in what Vettius Valens? tells us of 
Nechepso, who surpassed the Ammon of our literature 
and attained to direct knowledge of the Inner Way. 

Vettius, in the first half of the first century A.D., 
laments that he did not live in those days of initiate 
kings and rulers and sages who occupied themselves 
with the Sacred Science, when the clear Aither spake 
face to face with them without disguise, or holding 
back aught, in answer to their deep scrutiny of holy 
things. In those days so great was their love of the 
holy mysteries, so high their virtue, that they left the 
earth below them, and in their deathless souls became 
“ heaven-walkers ”* and knowers of things divine. 

Vettius then quotes from a Greek apocalyptic treatise 
of Nechepso, where the King tells us that he had 
remained in contemplation all night gazing into the 
ether ; and so in ecstasy he had left his body,* and had 
then heard a heavenly Voice® addressing him. This 
Voice was not merely a sound, but appeared as a 


1 Kroll, ii. 344; Riess, Frag. 33. 

2 Riess, Frag. 1. 

3 obvpavoBareiv. 

* So R. (5) completes a lacuna. 

5 Boh—presumably a parallel with the Bath-kol of Talmudic 
Rabbinism. 


102 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


substantial presence, who guided Nechepso on his way 
through the heaven-space. 

It is, moreover, exceedingly probable that the mag- 
nificent spectacle of the star-spheres! to which Vettius 
refers, speaking of it as “the most transcendent and 
most blessed vision (Oewpia) of all,” was taken directly 
from the same source. 

With this we may compare the wish of Trismegistus 
that Tat might get him the wings of the soul and 
enjoy that fair sight,? and the seeing of it by Hermes 
himself through the Mind.*® 

All of which proves the existence of books in Greek 
in middle Ptolemaic times treating in the same 
manner of identical subjects with those contained in 
our Trismegistic literature. 


MANETHO THE BELOVED oF THOTH 


When, then, the sovereignty of Egypt passed into the 
hands of the Diadochi of Alexander, and the Ptolemies 
made Alexandria the centre of learning in the Greek 
world, by the foundation of the ever-famous Museum 
and Library and Schools in their capital, there arose 
an extraordinary enthusiasm for translating, para- 
phrasing, and summarising into Greek of the old 
scriptures and records of the nations. The most famous 
name of such translators and compilers and comparative 
theologians is that of Manetho,* who introduced the 

1 The same rapturous vision of the soul after death is trans- 
lated by Seneca (Cons. ad Marciam, 18, 2) from Poseidonius 
(135-(2)51 B.c.), who also clearly derived it from the same 
Egyptian Hellenistic literature. 

2 0. H., v. (vi.) 5. 

3 OC, H., xi. (xii.) 6, 7; also Stob., Hel., i. 49 (386, 3, W.). 

4 There are some dozen variants in the spelling and accenting 


of this name in Greek transliteration; in Egyptian we are told 
it means “ Beloved of Thoth” (Mai en Thoth). 


MAIN SOURCE OF TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 103 


treasures of Egyptian mysticism, theology, mythology, 
history, and chronology to the Grecian world. More- 
over, seeing that the veracity and reliability of Manetho 
as a historian is with every day more and more 
accepted as we become better acquainted with the 
monuments, he seems to have done his work loyally 
enough. 

Manetho was contemporary with the first two 
Ptolemies; that is to say, he lived in the last years 
of the fourth and the first half of the third century B.c. 
He was a priest of Heliopolis (On),! and was thoroughly 
trained in all Greek culture? as well as being most 
learned in the ancient Wisdom of Egypt.? Manetho 
not only wrote on historical subjects, but also on the 
mystic philosophy and religion of his country, and it 
is from his books in all probability that Plutarch and. 
others drew their information on things Egyptian. 
Manetho derived his information from the hieroglyphic 
inscriptions in the temples* and from the rest of the 
priestly records; but unfortunately his books are almost 
entirely lost, and we only possess fragments quoted by 
later writers. 


THE LETTER OF MANETHO To ProLEMy PHILADELPHUS 


One of these quotations is of great importance for 
our present enquiry. It is preserved by Georgius 


1 Plutarch, De Is. et Osir., ix. and xxviii. 

2 Josephus, C. Apton., i. 14. 

3 Milian, De Animalium Natura, x. 16. 

4 Budge, op. sup. cit., i, 332, says: “A tradition says Solon, 
Thales, and Plato all visited the great college at Heliopolis, and 
that the last-named actually studied there, and that Manetho 
the priest of Sebennytus, who wrote a history of Egypt in Greek 
for Ptolemy II., collected his materials in the library of the 
priesthood of Ra.” 


104 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Syncellus, and is stated to be taken from a work of 
Manetho called Sothis? a work that has otherwise 
entirely disappeared. The passage with the introduc- 
tory sentence of the monk Syncellus runs as follows: 

“Tt is proposed then to make a few extracts concern- 
ing the Egyptian dynasties from the Books of Manetho, 
[This Manetho,] being high priest of the Heathen 
temples in Egypt, based his replies [to King Ptolemy] 
on the monuments * which lay in the Seriadic country. 
[These monuments,] he tells us, were engraved in the 
sacred language and in the characters of the sacred 
writing by Thoth, the first Hermes ; after the flood they 
were translated from the sacred language into the then 
common tongue,‘ but [still written] in hieroglyphic 
characters, and stored away in books by the Good 
Daimon’s son and the second Hermes, father of Tat 
—in the inner chambers of the temples of Egypt. 

*TIn the Book of Sothis Manetho addresses King 
Philadelphus, the second Ptolemy, personally, writing 
as follows word for word: 

“The Letter of Manetho, the Sebennyte, to Ptolemy 
Philadelphus. 

““To the great King Ptolemy Philadelphus, the 
venerable: I, Manetho, high priest and scribe of the 
holy fanes in Egypt, citizen of Heliopolis but by birth 
a Sebennyte,® to my master Ptolemy send greeting. 


1 Chron., xl. See Cory (I. P.), Ancient Fragments, pp. 178, 
174—mispaged as 169 (2nd ed.; London, 1832); and Miiller, 
Fragmenta Historicorum Grecorum, pp. 511 ff. (Paris, 1848). 

2 BiBAos SdOcos. 

3 ornaay, generally translated “columns” ; but the term is quite 
a general one and denotes any monument bearing an inscription. 

4 Syncellus has “into the Greek tongue,” an evident slip, as 
many have already pointed out. 

5 Sebennytus was the chief city of the Sebennyte province, 
situated about the centre of the Delta. Heliopolis or On, the 


a 


MAIN SOURCE OF TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 105 


“<«We! must make calculations concerning all the 
points which you may wish us to examine into, to answer 
your questions? concerning what will happen to the 
world. According to your commands, the sacred books, 
written by our forefather Thrice-greatest Hermes, which 
I study, shall be shown to you. My lord and king, 
farewell.’” 


THE IMPORTANCE OF MANETHO’S STATEMENT IN HIS 
“ SoTHIs ” 


Here we have a verbal quotation from a document 
purporting to be written prior to 250 Bc. It is evi- 
dently one of a number of letters exchanged between 
Manetho and Ptolemy II. Ptolemy has heard of the 
past according to the records of Egypt; can the priests 
tell him anything of the future? They can, replies 
Manetho; but it will be necessary to make a number 
of calculations. Ptolemy has also expressed a strong 
desire to see the documents from which Manetho 
derived his information, and the high priest promises 
to let him see them. 

These books are ascribed to Hermes, the Thrice- 
greatest, and this is the first time that the title is used 
in extant Greek literature. This Hermes was the 
second, the father of Tat, we are told elsewhere by 
Manetho, and son of the Good Spirit (Agathodaimon), 
who was the first Hermes. Here we have the precise 
grading of the degrees in our treatises: (i.) The 
Shepherd of Men, or The Mind; (ii.) Thrice-greatest ; 
(ii.) Tat. This refers to the ever-present distinction of 
pupil and master, and the Master of masters. 

City of the Sun, was situated some thirty miles north of 
Memphis. 

1 Presumably Manetho and his fellow priests. 

? Lit., “for you questioning.” 


106 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


If, however, we seek for historical allusions, we may 
perhaps be permitted to conclude that the first Hermes, 
that is to say the first priesthood among the Egyptians, 
used a sacred language, or in other words a language 
which in the time of the second Hermes, or second 
priesthood, was no longer spoken. It was presumably 
archaic Egyptian. The two successions of priests and 
prophets were separated by a “flood.” This “ flood” 
was presumably connected with, if not the origin of, the 
flood of which Solon heard from the priest of Sais, 
which happened some nine thousand years before his 
time, and of which we have considerable information 
given us in the Zimeus and Critias of Plato The 
Good Angel is the same as the Mind, as we learn from 
the Trismegistic literature, and was regarded as the 
father of Hermes Trismegistus. This seems to be a 
figurative way of saying that the archaic civilisation of 
Egypt before the flood, which presumably swept over the 
country when the Atlantic Island went down, was 
regarded as one of great excellence. It was the time 
of the Godg or Divine Kings or Demi-Gods, whose 
wisdom was handed on in mystic tradition, or revived 
into some semblance of its former greatness, by the lesser 
descendants of that race who returned from exile, or 
reincarnated on earth, to take charge of the new 
populations who had gradually returned to the lower 
Nile plains after the flood had subsided. 

Thus we have three epochs of tradition of the 
Egyptian mystery-cultus: (i.) The first Thoth or Agatho- 
daimon, the original tradition preserved in the sacred 
language and character in the stone monuments of the 


1 See my article on “ The Sibyl and her Oracles,” in The Theo- 
sophical Review, vol. xxii. pp. 399 ff. See also the passage preserved 
from the Ethiopian History of Marcellus by Proclus in his com- 
mentary on the Timeus of Plato ; Cory, Ancient Fragments, p. 233. 


eS eee 


MAIN SOURCE OF TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 107 


Seriadic land, presumably the Egypt prior to the 
Atlantic flood; (ii.) the second Thoth, the Thrice- 
greatest, the mystery-school after the period of the 
great inundation, whose records and doctrines were 
preserved not only in inscriptions but also in MSS., 
still written in the sacred character, but in the Egyptian 
tongue as it was spoken after the people reoccupied 
the country ; and (iii.) Tat, the priesthood of Manetho’s 
day, and presumably of some centuries prior to his time, 
who spoke a yet later form of Egyptian, and from 
whose demotic translations further translations or 
paraphrases were made in Greek. 


Is “Soruis” A ForGeEry ? 


This natural line of descent of the fundamental 
doctrines in the tradition of the Trismegistic litera- 
ture, however, is scouted by encyclopedism, which 
would have our sermons to be Neoplatonic forgeries, 
though on what slender grounds it bases its view we 
have already seen. It will now be interesting to see 
how the testimony of Manetho is disposed of. Our 
encyclopedias tell us that the book Sothis is obviously a 
late forgery; parrot-like they repeat this statement ; 
but nowhere in them do we find a single word of proof 
brought forward. Let us then see whether any scholars 
have dealt with the problem outside of encyclopzdism. 
Very little work has been done on the subject. The 
fullest summary of the position is given by C. Miiller.! 
Miiller bases his assertion on Béckh,? and Béckh on 
Letronne.? 

1 Frag. Hist, Gree., ut sup. cit. p. 512. 

2 A. Bockh, Manetho und die Hundsternperiode: ein Beitrag 
zur Geschichte der Pharaonen, pp. 14-17 (Berlin, 1845). 


3M. Letronne, Recueil des Inscriptions grecques et latines de 
P Egypte, tom. i., pp. 206, 280 ff. (Paris, 1842). 


108 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


The arguments are as follows: (i.) That the term 
“venerable” (ceBacrds) is not used prior to the time of 
the Roman emperors; (ii.) that Egypt knows no flood ; 
(iii.) that the ancient mythology of Egypt knows no 
first and second Hermes; (iv.) that Egypt has no 
Seriadic land; (v.) that the term “Trismegistus” is of 
late use. 


THE ARGUMENTS OF ENOCYCLOPZDISM REFUTED 


Let us take these arguments in order and examine 
them, bearing in mind, however, that the whole 
question has been prejudiced from the start, and that 
encyclopedism, in order to maintain its hypothesis of 
the spuriousness of our Trismegistic writings, is bownd 
to argue the spuriousness of Manetho’s Sothis. The cate- 
gorical statements of Manetho are exceedingly distressing 
to the former hypothesis; in fact, they give it the lie 
direct. As to the arguments, then : 

(i) The term oceBaords is in later times equated 
with “ Augustus,” the honorific title of the Roman 
emperors. Therefore, it is argued, it could not have 
been used prior to their times. But why not? The 
king to an Egyptian was divine—every inscription 
proves it—and the term “venerable” was in early 
times always applied to the Gods. Why not then 
apply it to the “Great King”? Indeed, what could be 
more natural than to do so? 

(ii.) We have already shown that, according to Plato, 
Egypt knew most accurately of a Flood; Plato further 
tells us that Solon got his information from the priests 
of Sais, who told him that all the records were 
preserved in the temple of Neith. 

It is not here the place to discuss the <Atlanticum of 
Plato and the long history of opinion connected with 


MAIN SOURCE OF TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 109 


it, for that would require a volume in itself. I have, 
however, acquainted myself with all the arguments for 
and against the authenticity of at least the germ of this 
tradition, and with the problems of comparative - 
mythology and folklore involved in it, and also with 
the recent literature of the subject which seeks to 
corroborate the main conceptions of Plato by the 
researches of seership. All this, taken in conjunction 
with the general subject of the “myths” of Plato, and 
the latest views on this subject, has convinced me that 
the greatest of Greek philosophers did not jest when, 
his dialectic having gone as far as it could, he sought 
refuge in the mystery-traditions for corroboration of 
those intuitions which his unaided intellect could not 
demonstrate. 

It can of course be argued that every reference to a 
flood in Egyptian Hellenistic literature is but a repeti- 
tion of what the incredulous must regard as Plato’s 
brilliant romance; but in this connection, as in many 
others, it is equally arguable that all such references 
' —Plato’s included—are derivable from one and the 
same source—namely, Egypt herself. 

And, indeed, on 9th November 1904, at a meeting of 
the Society of Biblical Archeology, a paper by Pro- 
fessor Naville was read by Mr F. Legge on “ A Mention 
of a Flood in the Book of the Dead.” The flood in 
question is that described in the Leyden version as 
Ch. elxxv.! 

(iii.) Cicero (106-44 B.c.) speaks of five Mercurii, the 
last two of whom were Egyptian.? One was the “son 
of Father Nile,” whose name the Egyptians considered 
it impiety to pronounce—and for whom, presumably, 
they substituted the term Agathodaimon; and the 


1 See The Athenewm, 12th November 1904. 
2 De Nat. Deorum, iii. 22. 


110 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


second was the later Thoyth, the-founder of Hermopolis.! 
Cicero could hardly have invented this; it must have 
been a commonplace of his day, most probably derived 
in the first instance from the writings of Manetho, 
from which generally the Greeks, and those imbued 
with Greek culture, derived all their information about 
Egypt. 

And, indeed, Reitzenstein (p. 139), though he refers 
the information given by Syncellus to a Pseudo- 
Manetho (without a word of explanation, however), 
admits that the genealogy of Hermes there given is in 
its main features old.? 


THE SERIADIC LAND 


(iv.) The statement that Egypt knew no Seriadic 
land or country seems to be a confident assertion, but 
the following considerations may perhaps throw a 
different light on the matter. 

In the astronomical science of the Egyptians 
the most conspicuous solar system near our own, 
represented in the heavens by the brilliant Sirius, was 
of supreme interest. Cycles of immense importance 
were determined by it, and it entered into the highest 
mysticism of Egyptian initiation. Sirius was, as it 
were, the guardian star of Egypt. Now ancient Egypt 
was a sacred land, laid out in its nomes or provinces 
according to the heavens, having centres in its body 
corresponding to the centres or ganglia of the heavens. 
As the Hindus had a Heavenly Ganges (Akasha-Ganga) 
and an earthly Ganges, so had the heavens a Celestial 


1 Ursin, De Zoroastre, etc., p. 73. 

2 For a permutation of the elements in this genealogy, in the 
interests of Heliopolis, see Varro, De Gente Pop, Rom., as quoted 
by Augustine in De Civ. Dei, xviii. 3 and 8, 


MAIN SOURCE OF TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 111 


Nile, and Egypt a physical Nile, the life-giver of the land. 
The yearly inundation, which meant and means every- 
thing for ancient and modern Khem, was observed with 
great minuteness, and recorded with immense pains, the 
basis of its cycle being the Sothiac or Siriadic; Sirius 
(Seirios) being called in Greek transliteration Sothis 
and Seth (Eg. Sept). What more natural name, then, 
to give to the country than the Seriadic Land ? 

The Nile records in ancient times were self-registered 
by pyramids, obelisks, and temples, and in later times 
nearly all monuments were built according to the type 
of the masonic instruments of the Egyptian astro- 
geological science. This science has been studied in 
our own times by an Egyptian, and the results of his 
researches have been printed “for private circulation,” 
and a copy of them is to be found in the British 
Museum. In his Preface the author writes as 
follows :1 

“The astrogeological science gave birth to a monu- 
mental system, by means of which the fruits of the 
accumulated observations and experience of the human 
race have been preserved, outliving writings, inscrip- 
tions, traditions, and nationalities. The principal 
monuments had imparted to them the essential property 
of being autochronous landmarks of a geochronological 
nature. Many of them recorded, hydromathematically, 
the knowledge in astronomy, in geography, and in the 
dimension and figure of the earth obtained in their 
respective epochs. They were Siriadic monuments, 
because their magistral lines were projected to the scale 

1 Hekekyan Bey, C. E., A Treatise on the Chronology of Siriadic 
Monuments, demonstrating that the Egyptian Dynasties of Manetho 
are Records of Astrogeological Nile Observations which have been con- 
tinwed to the Present Time—Preface, p. v. (London, 1863). The 


book deserves careful study, and cannot be hastily set aside with 
the impatience of prejudice. 


112 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


of the revolutions of the cycles of the star Surios (sic) 
in terms of the standard astrogeological cubit.” 

Doubtless our author flogs his theory too severely, as 
all such writers do; but nilometry and the rest was 
certainly one of the most important branches of the 
priestly science. 


THe STELZ OF HERMES 


But before we deal with the last objection urged 
against the authenticity of Manetho’s Sothis, we will 
add a few words more concerning these Seriadic monu- 
ments known in antiquity as the Stele of Hermes or 
of Seth, and erroneously spoken of in Latin and English 
as the “Columns ”’ or “ Pillars” of Hermes, 

The general reader may perhaps be puzzled at the 
variety of spelling of the name of the star, but he should 
recollect that the difficulties of transliteration from one 
language to another are always great, and especially so 
when the two languages belong to different families. 
Thus we find the variants of Tehuti, the Egyptian name 
of Hermes, transliterated in no less than nineteen 
various forms in Greek and two in Latin—such as Thoyth, 
Thath, Tat, etc.1. Similarly we find the name of the 
famous Indian lawgiver transliterated into English as 
Manu, Menu, Menoo, etc. 

With regard to these “Mercurii Columne,” it was 
the common tradition, as we have already pointed out, 
that Pythagoras, Plato, and others got their wisdom 
from these columns, that is to say, monuments.? The 


1 See Pietschmann, op. cit., pp. 31, 32; also Spiegelberg, 
Recueil des Travaua relatifs a la Philologie et a& VArchéologie 
égyptiennes et assyriennes, xxiii. 199, R.117,n. 1. 

2 See the last chapter of the book from which the following 
passage is quoted. See also Iamblichus, De Mysteriis, cap. ii., 
who in a very clear statement of the sources of his information, 


MAIN SOURCE OF TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 113 


historian Ammianus Marcellinus, the friend of the 
Emperor Julian, has preserved for us a peculiarity of 
the construction of some of these pyramids or temples 
which is of interest. The passage to which we refer 
runs as follows : 

“There are certain underground galleries and 
passages full of windings, which, it is said, the adepts 
in the ancient rites (knowing that the flood was coming, 
and fearing that the memory of the sacred ceremonies 
would be obliterated) constructed in various places, 
distributed in the interior [of the buildings], which were 
mined out with great labour. And levelling the walls, 
they engraved on them numerous kinds of birds and 
animals, and countless varieties [of creatures] of another 
world, which they called hieroglyphic characters.” * 

We are thus told of another peculiarity of some of 
the Seriadic monuments, and of the “ Books preserved 
from the Flood” of which there were so many traditions. 
These are the records to which Sanchuniathon and 
Manetho make reference. 


THE Sons OF SETH-HERMES 


The Egyptian account is straightforward enough ; but 
when Josephus, following the traditional practice of his 
race in exploiting the myths of more ancient nations 
for the purpose of building up Jewish history—for the 


and the method of treating the numerous points raised by 
Porphyry, says: “And if thou proposest any philosophical 
problem, we will resolve it for thee according to the ancient 
monuments of Hermes, on the thorough study of which Plato, 
and prior to him Pythagoras, founded their philosophy.” 

1 Who flourished in the early second half of the fourth 
century A.D. 

2 The passages and chambers being hewn out of the solid rock. 

3 Ammiant Marcellini Rerwm Gestarwm Libri qui supersunt, 
xxii. xv. 30; ed. V. Gardthausen (Leipzig, 1874), p. 301. 

VOL. I. 8 


114 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Mosaic Books supply innumerable examples of the 
working-up of elements which the Jews found in the 
records of older nations—runs away with the idea that 
Seth (the Egyptian Sirius) was the Biblical patriarch 
Seth, the Jewish “antiquarian” enters on a path of 
romance and not of history. "Tis thus he uses the 
Egyptian Seriadic tradition for his own purposes : 

“All of these [the Sons of Seth] being of good 
disposition, dwelt happily together in the same country 
free from quarrels, without any misfortune happening 
to the end of their lives, The [great] subject of their 
studies was that wisdom which deals with the heavenly 
bodies and their orderly arrangement. In order that 
their discoveries should not be lost to mankind and 
perish before they became known (for Adam had foretold 
that there would be an alternate disappearance of all 
things! by the force of fire and owing to the strength and 
mass of water)—they made two monuments,? one of 
brick and the other of stone, and on each of them en- 
graved their discoveries. In order that if it should 
happen that the brick one should be done away with 
by the heavy downpour,’ the stone one might survive 
and let men know what was inscribed upon it,at the same 
time informing them that a brick one had also been 
made by them. And it remains even to the present day 
in the Siriad land.” ¢ 

This passage is of great interest not only as affording 
a very good example of the method of inventing Jewish 
“antiquities,” but also as permitting us to recover the 
outlines of the original Egyptian account which Josephus 
purloined and adapted. The Sons of Seth were the 
initiates of the archaic priesthood of the First Hermes. 


1 tév drov. 2 orhras. 
3 érouBptas, a downpour or flood of rain. 
4 Josephus, Antt., I. ii. ; Cory’s An. Fragg., pp. 171, 172. 


MAIN SOURCE OF TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 115 


Adam has been substituted for the First Man, in the 
sense of our “Shepherd” tradition; and the two kinds 
of monuments (which Josephus seems to regard as 
two single structures and not as relating to two classes 
of buildings) may refer to the brick structures and 
temples of that age, and to specially constructed and 
more lasting monuments of stone—perhaps rock-cut 
temples, or the most ancient pyramids. I have also 
asked myself the question as to whether there may 
not be some clue concealed in this “‘ brick monument” 
reference to the puzzling statement in the Babylonian 
Talmud? that Jesus set up a “ brick-bat” and worshipped 
it. Jesus is said in the Talmud Jeschu Stories to have 
“learned magic in Egypt,” and the magical wisdom of 
ancient Egypt is here said to have been recorded on 
monuments of brick.? 

Reitzenstein (p. 183), after pointing to the similarity 
of tradition as to the Seriadic Land contained in Josephus, 
and in what he characterises as Pseudo-Manetho,’ adds 
the interesting information that the Seriadic Land is 
borne witness to by an inscription as being the home 
and native land of Isis ; indeed, the Goddess herself is 
given the name of WNeilotis or Seirias; she is the 
fertile earth and is Egypt.* 

To continue, then, with the consideration of the 
arguments urged against the authenticity of Manetho’s 
Sothis. With regard to objection (iv.), we have given 
very good reasons for concluding that so far from 
Egypt “knowing no Seriadic land,” Egypt was the 
Seriadic Land par excellence, and the Books of Hermes 


? Sanhedrin, 107 B; Sota, 47 a. 

2 See my Did Jesus Live 100 2.0. ?—pp. 137 if. and 147 ff. 

% A similarity already pointed out by Plew, Jahrb. f. Phil. 
(1868), p. 839. 

* Drexler in Roscher’s Lex. d. Myth., ii, 388, 408, 445. 


116 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


were the direct descendants of the archaic stone monu- 
ments of that land. And further, we have shown that 
our Trismegistic writings are a step or two further 
down in the same line of descent. The whole hangs 
together logically and naturally. 

We have thus removed four of the five props which 
support the hypothesis of forgery with regard to the 
Sothis document. Let us now see whether the remain- 
ing prop will bear the weight of the structure. 


THe EpiTrHet “ THRICE-GREATEST ” 


(v.) We are told that the term “Trismegistus” is of 
late use. This assertion is based entirely on the 
hypothesis that all our extant Trismegistic writings are 
Neoplatonic forgeries of the third or at best the second 
century, before which time the name Thrice-greatest 
was never heard of. The term Trismegistus must go 
as far back as the earliest of these writings, at any rate, 
and where we must place that we shall see at the end 
of our investigations. 

That the peculiar designation Trismegistus was known 
in the first century even among the Romans, however, 
is evident from the famous Latin epigrammatist Martial 
(v. 24), who in singing the praise of one Hermes, a famous 
gladiator, brings his pean to a climax with the line: 


Hermes omnia solus et ter wrus.} 


A verse which an anonymous translator in 1695 freely 
renders as: 
Hermes engrosses all men’s gifts in one, 
And Trismegistus’ name deserves alone. 
Such a popular reference shows that the name 
Trismegistus was a household word, and argues for 


1 Pietschmann misquotes this line, giving “ ter maximus” for 
“ter unus” (op. ctt., p, 36). 


MAIN SOURCE OF TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 117 


many years of use before the days of Martial (aD. 
43-104?). But have we no other evidence ? 

In the trilingual inscription (hieroglyphic, demotic, 
and Greek) on the famous Rosetta Stone, which sings 
the praises of Ptolemy Epiphanes (210-181 B.c.), Hermes 
is called the “Great-and-Great.”! Letronne renders 
this deuaw fois grand;? and in his notes* says that 
the term “ Trismegistus” was not known at this date, 
thus contemptuously waving aside Manetho’s Sothis. 
Had it been known, he says, it would undoubtedly have 
been used instead of the feebler expression “ great-and- 
great.”* But why undoubtedly? Let us enquire a 
little further into the matter. The Egyptian re- 
duplicated form of this attribute of Hermes, d@ ad, 
the “ great-great,” is frequently elsewhere found with a 
prefixed sign which may be transliterated wr.5 So 
that if the more simple form is translated by “great, 
great,” the intensive form would naturally be rendered 
“great, great, great,” or “three times great.” But 
we have to deal with the form “thrice-greatest,” a 
superlative intensive. We have many examples of 
adjectives intensified with the particle rpis in Greek, 


1 xabdmep ‘Eppiis 6 péyas nab péyas, line 19; the reading is 
perfectly clear, and I cannot understand the remark of Chambers 
(op. ctt., Pref. vii.) that Hermes is called “ péyas, péyas, wéeyas” 
on the Rosetta Stone. / 

2 “Inscription grecque de Rosette,” p. 3, appended to Miiller, 
Frag. Hist. Grec. (Paris, 1841). 

3 Ibid., p. 20, 

4 Recueil des Inscriptions grecques et latines de ? Figypte, i. 283 
(Paris, 1842). 

5 See Pietschmann, op. sup. cit., p. 35. 

6 In Greek not only is the term rpicuaxap (thrice-blessed) 
applied to Hermes in the inscriptions of Pselcis (see Letronne’s 
Recueil, i. 206 n.), but also in a Magical Prayer (Wessely, 1893— 
p. 38, ll. 550 ff. ; Kenyon, p. 102) he is addressed as rpiouéyas, or 
“ thrice-great” simply. 


118 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


but no early instances of their superlatives; therefore, 
what? Apparently that the term “Trismegistus” is a 
late invention. 

But may we not legitimately suppose, in the absence 
of further information, that when the Egyptian had 
intensified his reduplicated form he had come to an 
end of his resources—it was the highest term of great- 
ness that he could get out of his language? Not so 
when he used Greek. He could go a step further in 
the more plastic Hellenic tongue. Why, then, did he 
not use “ thrice-greatest” instead of “ great-and-great”’ 
on the Rosetta Stone ? 

Because he was translating a@ d&@ and not its 
intensified form. But why did he not use the 
intensified form in the demotic inscription? Well, 
“ whys” are endless ; but may we not suppose that, as 
Ptolemy was being praised for his justice, which he is 
said to have exercised “as Hermes the great-and-great,” 
the reduplicated form was sufficient for this attri- 
bute of the idealised priesthood, while the still more 
honorific title was reserved for Hermes as the per- 
sonified Wisdom? Or, again, may it not have been 
politic to refrain from adjectives which would have 
dimmed the greatness of Ptolemy ? 


THE CLUE OF GRIFFITHS 


So I wrote in November 1899, when the major part 
of this chapter was first published in Zhe Théosophical 
Review. Shortly afterwards, however, I came across an 
entirely new clue. In his Stories of the High Priests of 
Memphis: the Sethon of Herodotus and the Demotic Tales 
of Khamuas (Oxford, 1900), F. Ll. Griffiths presents 
us with the translation of an exceedingly interesting 
demotic text, found on the verso of two Greek docu- 


MAIN SOURCE OF TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 119 


ments, the contents of which prove them to be official 
land-registers of the seventh year of Claudius (A.D. 
46-47). There is also “strong evidence for attributing 
the demotic text to some time within thirty years from 
that date” (p. 41). So much for the copy of the 
original ; but what of its contents? As they belong to 
the most important cycle of folk-tales of Egypt, it is to 
be assumed that their form and substance is old. 

In this papyrus we are told that on an occasion of 
great need when the Pharaoh of Egypt was being over- 
- come at a distance by the sorceries of the Ethiopian en- 
chanters, he was saved, and the magic of the Black Ones 
sent back upon them, by a certain Hor, son of Pa-neshe, 
most learned in the Books. Before his great trial of 
strength with the Ethiopian spells, we read of this 
Hor that: 

“He entered the temple of Khmfin; he made his 
offerings and his libations before Thoth, the Eight-times- 
great, the Lord of Khmfn, the Great God” (p. 58). 

To this Griffiths appends the following note: 

“«Thoth, eight times great’; the remains of the 
signs indicate this reading. The title, which here 
appears for the first time in Egyptian literature, is the 
equivalent of tpicueyioros [thrice- greatest], a late 
epithet first used about the date of this MS. 6 is 
peyas [great], which we may represent algebraically by 
a; 6 6 (2a), a common title of Thoth in late hiero- 
glyphic, is peéeyas cat wéyas [great and great] on the 
Rosetta Stone, but probably represents péyioros 
[greatest], and 86 is therefore rpicpéyioros [thrice- 
greatest], ic. (2a). The famous epithet of Hermes 
which has puzzled commentators thus. displays its 
mathematical formation. 66=3(2a) would not fill the 


1 Griffiths here refers to Pietschmann as his authority for this 
statement. 


120 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


lacuna on the papyrus, nor would it give the obviously 
intended reference to the name of Thoth’s city, ‘the 
Eighth, and the mythological interpretation of that 
name.” 

The mythological interpretation of that name, namely 
Khmtn (Khemen-nw), which Budge transliterates 
Khemennu, Griffiths says is “the eighth city,” we. 
“the eighth in Upper Egypt going up the river.” ? 

We are loth to deprive any one of a so fair 
adaptation to environment in the evolution of purely 
physical interpretation; but we are afraid that our 
readers will have already learned for themselves that 
Khemennu was the City of the Eight, the City of the 
Ogdoad, and will expect some less mundane explanation 
of the name; not that we altogether object to Khemennu 
being the “ Highth City up the River,” if that river is 
interpreted as the Celestial Nile on which the soul of 
the initiated sailed in the solar boat. 

Reitzenstein then is wrong in supposing (p. 117, n. 6) 
that Griffiths connects the honorific title Trismegistus 
with the eight cynocephali who form the paut of Thoth ; 
but we may do so. 

The nature of this symbolic Ogdoad is most clearly 
seen in the inscription of Dér-el-Bahari, of the time of 
the Twenty-second Dynasty which Maspero has lately 
published.” 

In it the Osirified says to the Supreme: 

“T am One who becomes Two; I am Two who 
becomes Four; I am Four who becomes Eight; I am 
the One after that.” 

So also in the first Hermes Prayer, quoted in a 
preceding chapter, addressed to Hermes as Agatho- 


1 Of. Proc, Soc, Bib. Arch, (1899), p. 279. 
2 Recueil des Travaux relat. & la Phil. et & PArchéol. egypt. et 
assyr., xxiii. 196. Of. R. 54. 


MAIN SOURCE OF TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 121 
j 


daimon, Thoth is he “whom the Eight Wardens 
guard,” 

These Eight, we may perhaps be permitted to specu- 
late, were generated Two from One, ad@ ad, Greatest ; 
Four from Two, Twice-greatest; Hight from Four, 
Thrice-greatest. 

Such a combination would specially commend itself 
to men trained in Pythagorean mathematical symbols, 
as were doubtless many who took part in compiling the 
Egyptian Hellenistic theosophical literature, 

I, therefore, conclude that the honorific title Thrice- 
greatest can very well go back to early Ptolemaic times ; 
and therefore, as far as I can see, the authenticity of 
Manetho’s Sothis stands unimpugned as far as any 
arguments so far brought against it are concerned, I 
therefore regard the quotation of Syncellus as a most 
valuable piece of information in tracing the genesis of 
the Trismegistic literature. Whether or not any of our 
extant sermons can be placed among these earlier forms 
of this literature will be discussed later on. 


THE EARLIEST TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 


That, however, literature of a similar nature existed 
in early and middle Ptolemaic times we have already 
seen from the material adduced at the beginning of 
this chapter; we may therefore fitly conclude it by 
pointing out that in later Ptolemaic times, and down 
to the first century a.D., we find in the same litera- 
ture specimens of cosmogenesis closely resembling the 
main elements of the world-formation given in our 
* Shepherd ” treatise. 

An excellent example is that of the fragmentary 
cosmogonical poem, the text of which Reitzenstein has 
printed in his Zwei religionsgesch, Fragen, to which we 


123 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


have already referred. This poem Reitzenstein (p. 92) 
dates as belonging to the first century B.c., though it 
may probably be earlier ; it declares itself to be of the 
Hermes tradition, both in its statement about itself 
and also in the fact that it is Hermes, the Beloved 
Son of Zeus, who is the Logos-Creator of the cosmos, 
and also the progenitor or “father” of the prophet- 
poet who writes the vision. 


Pxito BYBLIus 


But not only did the tradition of Egyptian Hermes 
dominate the Greek forms of cosmogony which 
emanated from Alexandria and spread through the 
Hellenic world, but it also imposed itself upon the 
forms of cosmogony and the history-writing of other 
nations; the most striking example of this is to be 
found in the Phenician Histories of Philo Byblius, who 
lived in the second half of the first century A.D. 

The fragments of this work are of great interest to 
our present enquiry, as they tend to show that both 
Egypt and Pheenicia, the two most sacred nations, 
derived their cosmogonical knowledge and mystery- 
traditions from the same source; that source being 
traced to the most archaic Books of Thoth. 

This is all, no doubt, an overwriting of Pheenician 
records in the light of Egyptian tradition; Philo, 
however, would have us regard his work as a Greek 
translation or paraphrase of a compilation made by an 
ancient and learned Pheenician priest, Sanchuniathon, 
based immediately upon archaic Pheenician records by 
one who was also learned in the oral tradition of his 
own mysteries. 

The initial question as to whether Philo had a 
genuine Phoenician document before him or not, need 


MAIN SOURCE OF TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 123 


not occupy us here, save in the most superficial fashion, 
as we are at present interested in the Egyptian 
elements of his account solely, and not in disentangling 
the native Pheenician substratum, 

It must, however, in fairness be said that though 
the Byblian prefaces his account with an introduction 
and intersperses it with occasional remarks, all this is 
transparently his own, and is clearly distinguishable 
from what have every appearance of being translated 


passages, 


ARE HIS “ PH@:NICIAN HISTORIES” A FORGERY ? 


The general theory, however, since the time of Orelli! 
has been that Philo forged the whole of this cosmogony 
and history. On the contrary, it was made considerable 
use of by Porphyry in his criticism of Christianity, and 
Eusebius? quotes the passages used by Porphyry.’ 
The whole work of Philo, moreover, is claimed to be 
recovered by Wagenfeld, who has elaborately defended 
its genuineness. There indeed seems no reason to 


1J.C. Orelli, Sanchoniathonis Berytit que feruntur Fragmenta 
(Leipzig, 1826). 

2 Preparatio Evangelica, I. vi., vii 

3 These are collected by Cory in his Ancient Fragments, pp. 
3 ff. (London, 1832); and they may also be found in C. Miiller, 
Fragmenta Historicorwm Grecorum, “Philo Byblius,” iii. pp. 560 
ff, (Paris, 1848). 

4 F. Wagenfeld, Sanchuniathon’s Urgeschichte der Phénizier in 
einem Auszuge aus der wieder aufyefundenen Handschrift von Philo’s 
vollstéindiger Ubersetzung (Hanover, 1836). In the following year 
Wagenfeld published the Greek text with a Latin translation 
under the title Sanchoniathonis Historiarwm Phenicie Libri IX. 
(Bremz, 1837). For the further consideration of the reliability 
of Sanchuniathon, see Count (Wolf Wilhelm) Baudissin’s Studien 
zur semitischen Religionsgeschichte, Heft ii., “Uber den religions- 
geschichtlichen Werth der phénicischen Geschichte Sanchuni- 
athon’s” (Leipzig, 1876). 


124 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


accept the forgery-hypothesis, which apparently rests 
on an even flimsier basis than the forgery-theory of 
the Trismegistic writings. The work, on the contrary, 
considered as a specimen of Pheenician story strongly 
influenced by Egyptian tradition, is a most interest- 
ing document for understanding the ancient Semitic 
mystery-tradition as distinguished from Jewish adapta- 
tions of general Semitic legend—in other words, the 
distinction of Semitismus and Israélitismus. Porphyry 
was not only a Semite himself but also a good critic, 
and not likely to base his arguments on a forgery; 
nor would Philo have ventured to put forward a 
forgery when there were thousands of learned and 
fanatical Jews who would have been only too glad to 
expose it. 

Philo tells us that the Phoenician public traditions 
being chaotic, “Sanchuniathon, a man of great learning 
and a busy searcher [after knowledge], who especially 
desired to know the first principles from which all 
things are derived, most carefully examined the Books 
of Taaut, for he knew that Taaut was the first of all 
under the sun who discovered the use of letters and 
the writing of records. So he started from him, making 
him as it were his foundation—from him the Logos 
whom the Egyptians called Théuth, the Alexandrians 
Thoth,! but whom the Greeks have turned into Hermes.’’? 


SANCHUNIATHON AND THE Books oF HERMES 


This evidently means that the source of Sanchuni- 
athon’s information as to the mystic beginning of 
things was derived from the Books of Thoth, and 


1 Perhaps attempts at transliterating the dialectic variants of 
Upper and Lower Egypt of the name Tehuti. 
_ 2 Wagenfeld’s text, Procem., p. 2; Euseb., Prep. Ev., I. ix. 29. 


MAIN SOURCE OF TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 125 


that this was so may be seen from the following 
passage : 

“He supposes the beginning of all things to consist 
of a Dark Mist of a spiritual nature, or as it were a 
Breath of dark mist, and of a turbid Chaos black as 
Erebus ;! that these were boundless, and for many an 
age” remained without abound. ‘ But when,’ he ® says, 
‘the Spirit fell in love with his own principles,* and 
they were interblended, that interweaving was called 
Love ;* and this Love was the origin of the creation of all 
things. But [Chaos] did not know its own creation.® 
From its embrace with Spirit Mot was born?’ From 
her [M6t, the Great Mother] it was that every seed of 
the creation came, the birth of all the cosmic bodies. 

“«TFirst of all] there were [Great] Lives® devoid of 
sensation, and out of these came subsequently [Great] 


1 This is the beginning of the out-breathing of the universe or 
of any system ; it is the Great Breath or Spirit moving on the 
Waters of Chaos, the primal nebula, Erebus was fabled to be a 
region of nether darkness separating Earth and Hades (not Hell), 
It was the Dark Side of Heaven. 

2 Lit., zon. 

3 That is, Sanchuniathon ; so that we may take this passage as 
a direct quotation, or rather translation. 

* Or sources ; that is, the primal states of Matter or Chaos, 

5 Pothos, wé@os ; yearning, longing—love for all that lives and 
breathes. This union was symbolised not only among the 
Pheenicians but also among most of the other nations by an egg, 
round which a serpent twines. When the egg and serpent are 
represented apart they stand for “Chaos” and “Ether,” matter 
and spirit ; but when united they represent the hermaphrodite or 
male-female first principle of the universe, spirit-matter, called in 
Greek translation Pothos or Erés, 

8 Of, “ The Darkness comprehended it not” of the Proem to the 
Fourth Gospel. 

7 Here Philo, the translator, volunteers the information that 
some call this prime plasm of Chaos, “Slime,” others explain it as 
“ Fermentation,” in a watery sort of medium. 

8 The primal elements and their subdivisions. 


126 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Lives possessed of intelligence.1 The latter were called 
Zophasemin (that is to say, “ Overseers of the Heavens ”). 
The latter were fashioned in the form of eggs, and shone 
forth as Mot, the Sun and Moon, the Stars and the 
great Planetary Spheres. 

“*Now as the [original] nebula began to lighten, 
through its heat mists and clouds of sea and earth? 
were produced, and gigantic downpours and torrents of 
the waters in the firmaments. Even after they were 
separated,? they were still carried from their proper 
places by the heat of the sun, and all the [watery and 
earthy elements] met together again in the nebula one 
with the other, and dashed together, amid thunder and 
lightning ; and over the crash of the thunderings the 
[Great] Rational Lives before-mentioned watched,* while 
on the land and sea male and female cowered at their 
echo and were dismayed.’ 

“After this our author proceeds to say: ‘ These 
things we found written in the Cosmogony of Taaut, 
and in his commentaries, based on his researches and 
the evidences which his intelligence saw and discovered, 
and so enlightened us.’” ® 

There are many other points of interest in Philo’s 
translation, but we need not elaborate them here. One 
point, however, must not be omitted, because of its 
importance with regard to the Hermes-A‘sculapius 
tradition, an important factor in the Trismegistic 
writings. 

1 The same distinction is made in the cosmogonic account in 
“ The Shepherd,” but with more detail. 

2 Presumably still mingled together, as in the account in “ The 
Shepherd.” 

3 That is to say, after the land and water were separated. 

4 éypnydpnoev. The same expression is used in the Greek transla- 
tion of The Book of Enoch, in speaking of the Watchers (Egrégores). 

5 Op. cit., i. ii., pp. 8 ff. 


MAIN SOURCE OF TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 127 


“And Cronus [Ammon] going to the land of the 
South gave the whole of Egypt to the God Taaut to be 
his kingdom. All these things were first recorded by 
the Seven Sons of Sydyk, the Cabiri, and their eighth 
brother, Asclepius, as it was commanded them by the 
God Taaut.”? 

ésculapius is here at once identified with the cult 
of the “Great Gods” (425, KBR, Kabirim), who were, 
according to the old Semitic tradition, the Sons of King 
Sydyk (? Melchizedec). The whole subject of the very 
ancient mysteries of these Great Gods is one of immense 
interest, but we must not be tempted to follow this 
alluring bye-path.2 Enough has been said to show 
that both Sanchuniathon and the writer of “The 
Shepherd” drew their accounts of cosmogony from the 
same sources, namely, the “ Books of Thoth,” or, in other 
words, the Egyptian mystery-tradition. 

1 Op. cit., viii. p. 26. 

2 The best source of information is the art. “ Megaloi Theoi,” 


in Roscher’s Ausfiihrliches Lexikon der griechischen u. rémischen 
Mythologie, I1. ii. (Leipzig, 1894-97). 


VI 


AN EGYPTIAN PROTOTYPE OF THE MAIN 
FEATURES OF THE PEMANDRES’ COSMOGONY 


THE HIaHER CRITICISM OF THE “ PQIMANDRES” 


ONE has only to read through the remains of the 
Trismegistic literature preserved to us to assure him- 
self that the whole of it looked back to the Poemandres 
instruction as the most primitive form of the tradition 
in the language of Greece. The extant form of our 
“ Poemandres ” sermon is clearly not the most primitive 
form; but whatever that form was, it must have con- 
tained the cosmological part. 

Now, if we regard this cosmogenesis as a purely 

literary compilation, the task of the higher criticism will 
be to try to sift out the various elements in it, and if 
possible to trace them to their sources. 
\ But before making any attempt of this nature, it will 
be as well to consider the nature of the literary art of 
our document. It purports itself to be an apoca- 
lypse, or rather the record of an apocalyptic vision, and 
not a purely literary compilation from already existing 
literary sources. It declares itself to be the work of a 
seer and prophet and not of a scribe or commentator ; it 
claims to be an inspired document, a scripture, and not 
the work of a schoolman, 

Of this class of writing we have very many examples 


in other scriptures, and it will be as well to consider 
128 


A PROTOTYPE OF THE PEMANDRES COSMOGONY 129 


briefly the nature of such documents. In the original 
form of apocalypses we do not as a rule find that 
prior formal literary material is used—that is to say, we 
do not find that previously existing written sources are 
incorporated ; what we do find is that in almost every 
case the seer uses the forms and terms of previously 
existing ideas to express what he sees. These forms 
and terms are found in already existing written and 
oral traditions, and the prophetical writer is compelled 
to use the thought-language of his own mind and of 
that of his age to express himself. This, however, does 
not negate the possibility of his having seen a true 
vision, of his having been inspired. 

It is evident that whoever wrote the “ Pomandres” 
must have been saturated with the religious, mystical, 
philosophic, and scientific thought of his age, clothed in 
the forms of the thought-language of his day; and it 
is also clear that whatever “newness” there may have 
been in him, was owing to the nature of the “touch” 
of inspiration he had received. This striking of a new 
keynote, as it were, in his inner nature, enabled him to 
regroup and reconstruct the previous ideas he had 
imbibed from his studies. 


A PROTOTYPE OF ITS COSMOGENESIS 


Now as far as our cosmogenesis is concerned, it has 
not yet been found possible to trace the exact verbal 
forms of its elements to any precise literary sources, 
but it has been found possible to point to written 
sources which contain similar ideas ; and not only so, 
but with regard to the main features of it, a distinct 
prototype has been found in Egypt itself. This dis- 
coveryis due to Reitzenstein (pp.59 ff.),and the prototype 
is to be found in an Egyptian inscription in the British 

.VOL. I. 9 


130 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Museum, which was first read correctly and interpreted 
by Dr J. H. Breasted.! Before using it, however, Reit- 
zenstein got his colleague Professor Spiegelberg to go 
through it; and again when Maspero, in reviewing? 
Breasted’s work, had further confirmed the view of it 
which Reitzenstein had in his mind, Spiegelberg again 
revised certain points in the translation owing to 
Maspero’s suggestions. 

The inscription itself is dated about the eighth 
century B.C., but it states that it is the reproduction of 
a then old written text from the temple of Ptah at 
Memphis. 

The chief content has to do with the Osiris-myth, but 
into this is inserted the distinctive Ptah-doctrine. 
Ptah is supposed by some to have originally been 
simply the god of handicraft, seeing that he is equated 
by the Greek interpreters of god-names with Hephaistos. 
He was, however, rather the Demiurgus, for in very 
early times he is found in the closest connection with 
the Gods of Heaven and Gods of Light, and is conceived 
as the Dispenser of all life. 

In our text Ptah is brought into the closest relations 
with the Supreme Deity (Atum). This “God the 
Father” emanates from himself eight deities (the 
Ogdoad). Each one of these is Ptah with a distinctive 
epithet. To the fourth? of them, “Ptah the Great,” 
a theological system is attached, which, though not 
entirely ignoring the former presentation, is but loosely 
interwoven with it. 

Before, however, Reitzenstein proceeds to deal with 
this, he gives Professor Spiegelberg’s translation of a 


1 Zeitschr. f. dg. Sprache (1901), pp. 39 ff. 

2 “Sur la Tout-puissance de la Parole,” Recuetl des Travauz rel. 
& la Phil. . .. égypt., xxiv. 168 ff. 

3 The God of Fire and Mind, 


A PROTOTYPE OF THE PEMANDRES COSMOGONY 131 


Prayer to Ptah, of the time of Ramses III. (¢ 1233 
B.c.), from the Papyrus Harris (I. 44, 3 ff), in order 
to make clearer the circle of ideas into which we 
shall be introduced. This Prayer is as follows: 


A PraIsE-Givinc To Prawn 


“Hail to thee! Thou art great, thou art old, 

Tatenen,' Father of the gods, 

God ancient from the beginning ; 

Who fashioned men, 

Who made the gods, 

Who began with the creation as the first creator, 

Who created for all who came after him, 

Who made the heaven; as his heart ? he created it ; 

Who hanged it up, 

As God Shu raised himself ;* 

Who founded the earth of thy own power, 

Who circled in the primal water of the Great Green,* 

Who created the invisible world, which brings the 
dead bodies to rest; 


1 An epithet of Ptah. But compare the Hymn to Ra given by 
Budge (op. cit., i. 339): “Praise to thee O Ra. exalted Sekhem, 
Ta-thenen, Begetter of his Gods.” Sekhem is vital “ power” ; 
Tathenen is, therefore, presumably Creative Life, or the Demiurgic 
or Creative Power. On page 230 Budge tells us that Tathenen 
is elsewhere symbolised as a fire-spitting serpent armed with a 
knife. 

2 The Heaven is the Great Heart of the Great Cosmos; in man 
the little cosmos, the heart, was the seat of the true understanding 
and will. 

3 Shu generally represents the dry air between the earth and 
sky. Of. the Hymn to Amen-Ra: “ Thou art the One God, who 
did’st form thyself into two gods ; thou art the creator of the egg, 
and thou did’st produce thy Twin-gods” (Budge, op. cit., ii. 89). 
Shu’s twin or syzygy is Tefnut, who in terrene physics represents 
the moist air ; but Shu is elsewhere equated with the Light. 

* The Ocean of Heaven. 


132 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Who let Ra come to make them glad, 

As Prince of Eternity, 

Lord of Eternity, 

Lord of Life ; 

Who fills the lungs with air, 

Who gives breath to every nostril, 

Who vivifies all beings with his gifts. 

Length of life, fortune, and fate are subject unto him 

They live by that which goeth forth out of his 
mouth,} 

Who made contentment for all the gods, 

In his form of ancient primal water ;? 

Lord of Eternity, to whom Eternity is subject, 

Breath of Life for all beings.” 


There are other hymns of an exactly similar nature 
in which other gods are praised, especially Thoth and 
Horus. And now to turn to our inscription, and to 
that part of the text assigned to the fourth of the 
Forms of Manifestation, or Aspects or Persons, of Ptah. 


PraH-THOTH THE WISE ONE 


1. 52. Ptah the Great is the heart and tongue of the 
god-circle.® 

§ 1, 7. 53. (Two gods)* are they, the one as _ heart, 
the other as tongue, emanations of Atum. Exceeding 
great is Ptah; if he... then are their ka’s in this 
heart and tongue [of his]. 

1, 54, When Horus arose in him (Atum) as Ptah, and 
when Thoth arose in him as Ptah, the power of heart 


1 The life or breath of the Creator. 

2 Sc. the water of the Great Green. 

5 Paut, sphere, or group, or company, or hierarchy, or pleroma, 
—here an Ogdoad. 

4 Namely, Thoth and Horus, 


A PROTOTYPE OF THE PHMANDRES COSMOGONY 133 


and tongue came into being through him. (It is Atum) 
who brings forth his being out of every body and out 
of every mouth of all the gods. All men, all quadru- 
peds, all creeping things live through his thinking and 
uttering whatsoever he will. 

§ 2,2. 55. His god-circle is before him; he is teeth 
[and] lips, vessels [and] hands, Atum (is in his) god- 
circle; Atum is in his vessels, in his hands; the god- 
circle is also teeth and lips in that mouth which hath 
uttered the name of everything, and out of which Shu 
and Tefnut have proceeded.? 

il. 56. Then the god-circle organised the seeing of 
the eye, the hearing of the ear, the smelling of the nose, 
wherewith they made the desire of the heart to arise. 
And this [heart] it is which accomplishes every desire, but 
it is the tongue which repeats? what the heart desires. 

§ 3. He (Ptah) gives existence® unto all gods, to 
Atum and his god-circle, for every god-word* comes 
into existence through the desire of the heart and the 
command of the tongue. 

l. 57. He makes the ka . . .; he makes all nourish- 
ment and all offerings > with this word; he makes what 

1 That is, the heart (Horus) rules action by fingers (and toes), 
by means of the ducts or vessels (arteries, veins, and nerves) 
leading to them, and all that these mean on the hidden side of 
things; while the tongue in the mouth (Thoth), by means of 
teeth and lips, is the organ of speech, or intelligent or meaning 
utterance. 

2 This appears to be a mistranslation ; it seems by what follows 
to mean “commands” or “ gives expression to.” 

3 Not being; that is, brings them into manifestation. He is the 
Demiurge. 

4 R. glosses this as hieroglyph; but it should perhaps mean 
“word of the language of the gods”—the language shown by action 
in the world. 

5 That is to say, apparently, the fruit of actions on which gods 
and men feed. Cf. Hermes-Prayer, II. 2, where Hermes is said to 
“ collect the nourishment of gods and men.” 


134 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


is loved and what is hated. He gives life to the pious, 
death to the impious. He makes every fabric, and every 
fabrication. 

, 58. The doing of the arms, the going of the feet, 
the movement of all limbs, is accomplished by the 
utterance of the word, because of the desire of the 
heart, [the word] which comes from the tongue and 
effects the whole of all things. So arises the 
teaching: Atum has made the gods to become Ptah 
Tatenen! so soon as the gods come into existence. 
All things proceed from him: sacrifice and food as well 
as oblation and all fair things. 

§ 4, 7. 59. He is Thoth the Wise, whose power is 
greater than that of the other gods. He (Thoth) 
at-oned himself with Ptah, after he had brought forth 
all things and all god-words;? after that he had 
fashioned the gods, had made the cities, settled the 
nomes, established the gods in their shrines, 

1. 60. When he had ordained their sacrifices, founded 
their shrines, and had made statues of [?for] their 
bodies for their contentment. 

§ 5. If the gods enter into their body, so is he 
(Ptah) in every wood, in every jewel, in every metal? 
All things thrive after him if they [the gods] are there. 
To him all gods and their ka’s make oblation, uniting 
and binding themselves together [for him who is] Lord 
of the Two Lands.* 


1 That is, as we have seen above, Ptah as the Demiurgic Power. 

2 Hieroglyphics ; showing that the oldest hieroglyphics were 
symbols of the words of action—that is tu say, modes of expression 
of being in action. 

8 Lit., copper. 

* That is, the worlds of gods, or immortals, and of men, or mortals. 
But Reitzenstein says: “Thus the God of Memphis [t.e. Ptah] 
is the divinity or ‘the God’ of all Egypt”—meaning thereby the 
physical upper and lower lands ; but I prefer a wider sense. 


A PROTOTYPE OF THE PEMANDRES COSMOGONY 135 


With these words the special theological system 
attached to the fourth person of Ptah is concluded, and 
the text returns to the Osiris-myth. 


EGYPTIAN SYNCRETISM 1000 B.c. 


From this most interesting inscription copied from 
an ancient written document, we learn in the first place 
that in Egypt already, a good thousand years before the 
date of our “ Poemandres,” we have what the critical 
mind would call a distinct specimen of syncretism ; 
namely, an attempt to combine three God-myths, or 
traditions, into a single system. These, if we persist in 
taking a purely traditional view, are: (i.) The Hermo- 
politan myth of Thoth as the Logos-Demiurge, who also 
in it frequently appears as an aspect of the Supreme; 
(ii.) The doctrine of the Ptah-priests of Memphis, 
according to which Ptah as the Primal Deity creates 
himself and all gods and men, and fashions the world ; 
and (iii.) The Heliopolitan theology, in which Atum as 
the first of an ennead of gods unites his eight fellow- 
gods in himself and is the Primal God and Primal Basis 
of all things. 

In all this the scribe or prophet has employed very 
early conceptions: on the one hand, that the plurality of 
gods are but “members” of a One and Only God; and 
on the other, that a sharply-defined and in some respect 
special God is similar to another more-general God in 
some particular attribute of his. Thus Atum is really 
the Primal God; but the God-circle, his “Body” (or 
Pleroma), consists of Hight different Forms of Ptah. 
Atum has emanated them ; heis therefore “ he who him- 
self creates himself”; but equally so has Ptah created 
Atum and himself. The most important Member of this 
universal Ptah-Being or Cosmic God is Ptah the Great, 


136 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


who is Heart and Tongue—the former as Horus, the 
latter as Thoth. Thoth proceeds into manifestation 
as Tongue or Word to accomplish the cosmic purpose; 
but the Word is only the thought which has proceeded, 
or in a certain fashion emanated, out of the Person. 
Thoth and Horus are inseparably united with Ptah. 

Reitzenstein thinks that the occasion for introducing 
the whole of this system into an exposition which other- 
wise deals with the Osiris-myth, was afforded by the parts 
played by Horus and Thoth in that myth. But it is 
evidently in itself a special system in which Thoth was 
the One God, the Word by whom all things were made. 

All of this must be quite manifest to any careful 
reader, and therefore there is no reason for its further 
elaboration. But though we have recovered one speci- 
men of this kind of syncretism only, it is not to be 
supposed that it was unusual ; indeed, it was a necessity 
in Egypt, where, beyond all other lands, the idea of a 
number of divinities united in one, each showing forth 
in separation some attribute dominantly, but in union 
possessing simultaneously the attributes of all the 
others, was the only key possible to a state of affairs 
where a plurality of gods existed side by side with 
the doctrines of the One and the All. 


THE DoctTrRINE OF “ PQ@:IMANDRES” COMPARED WITH 
THAT OF ITS PROTOTYPE 


Nevertheless, our inscription is not only of general 
use, but of special use for an elucidation of the main 
elements in the “Pomandres” cosmogony. Any 
attempt to translate the ideas of the Atum-Ptah-Thoth 
combination into Greek could have resulted in no 
other nomenclature than @éos (God)—éyucovpyos or 
Snusoupyos vous (Demiurge or Demiurgic Mind)—vyods 


= se 


A PROTOTYPE OF THE PEEMANDRES COSMOGONY 137 


and Adyos (Mind and Word), as is the case in our 
treatise. 

This argument is all the stronger if we reflect that 
if Thoth, after the ordering of the cosmos, at-oned him- 
self again with Ptah, then he must have completed 
this ordering which was emanated from Ptah. It is 
thus that the writer has brought to clear expression 
the conception that the Word is the Proceeding 
Thought of Ptah, and that both are inseparably united 
with one another. 

So, too, we find in the “ Poemandres” that the Logos, 
after the completion of the cosmic ordering, returns to 
the Demiurgic Mind and is at-oned with him. 

This similarity of fundamental conception cannot be 
due to chance, and we must therefore conclude that a 
doctrine essentially corresponding with the theology of 
our inscription is the main source of the “ Poemandres ” 
cosmogony. This fairly establishes the main content 
of our cosmogony on an Egyptian ground. 

If to this we add the general Egyptian belief that 
a man’s soul, after being “ purified” in the after-death 
state, goes back to God, to live for the eternity as a god 
with the gods, then we have established the chief part 
of the “‘ Poemandres” treatise as the Hellenised doctrine 
of the Egyptian priests—the mystery-tradition. 

With all of this agrees the thought that the God as 
Mind dwells in the pious, as we learn from the Hermes 
Prayers. So also it is Ptah in our inscription who 
gives life to the pious and death to the impious. In 
very early accounts we find Ptah, the Mind, is the 


1 This does not mean, I hold, that there was no “reincar- 
nation,” that is, that the “being” of the man did ‘not emanate 
other “souls,” but that the “soul” of a particular life did not 
return—that all of it deserving of immortality became a god with 
the gods, or “ those-that-are,” and do not only ea-ist. 


138 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


imparter of the gnosis for the gods—that is, as a 
Greek would say, he was the inventor of philosophy, 
as indeed Diogenes Laértius tells us (Procem. 1): “The 


Egyptians declare that Hephaistos was the source of 


philosophy, the presidents of which are priests and 
prophets.” Ptah, the Mind, reveals himself to his own 
and gives them good counsel; “Ptah hath spoken to 
thee,” Suidas tells us (s.v.), was a Greek-Egyptian saying, 
which is best elucidated by the Stele of Intef, which 
tells us that the people say of the heart of Intef: “It is 
an oracle of the god which is in every body.” ! 

All of this and much more of a like nature make it 
indubitably clear that the fundamental conceptions of 
the “ Poemandres” are Egyptian, and that the theory 
of Neoplatonic forgery must be for ever abandoned; 
so that even the dreams of Dévéria are nearer the 
truth than the confident assertions of many a great 
name in scholarship. 


THe MaAn-DoctTRINE 


But what, says Reitzenstein (p. 69), is not Egyptian, 
is the doctrine of the Man, the Heavenly Man, the 
Son of God, who descends and becomes a slave of the 
Fate-Sphere ; the Man who, though originally endowed 
with all power, descends into weakness and bondage, and 
has to win his own freedom and regain his original state. 

This doctrine seems to have been in its origin part 
and parcel of the Chaldean mystery-tradition; but it was 
widely spread in Hellenistic circles, and had analogies 
in all the great mystery-traditions, as we shall now 
proceed to see, and chiefly by the analysis of what has 
hitherto been regarded as one of the most chaotic and 
puzzling documents of Gnosticism. 


1 Of. Breasted, Zeit. f. dig. Spr. (1901), p. 47. 


Vil 
THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 


THE GNosTic TRADITION 


“Bur All-Father Mind, being Life and Light, did bring 
forth Man (”"Av@pw7rov) co-equal to Himself.” ! 

So runs the opening paragraph of what we may call 
the soteriological part of the “ Poemandres” treatise of 
our Trismegistic literature. This Man or Anthrdpos is 
the Spiritual Prototype of humanity and of every 
individual man, and is a technical term found in a 
number of the early Christianised Gnostic systems. 

For instance, in a system some outlines of which are 
preserved in the polemical Refutation of Irenzeus,? and 
which the Bishop of Lyons seems to associate with an 
Ophite tradition, while Theodoret*® ascribes it to the 
Sethians, we are told that in the Unutterable Depth 
were two Great Lights,—the First Man, or Father, and 
His Son, the Second Man; and also the Holy Spirit, 
the First Woman, or Mother of all living. 

In this tradition, moreover, the Son of the Mother— 
the chief Formative Power of the seven Demiurgic 
Potencies of the sensible cosmos—is called Ialdabadth 
(? the Child of the Egg), who boasts himself to be 

1, Hi, 12. 

2 Contra Om. Her., I. xxx.; ed. A. Stieren (Leipzig, 1853), 
i, 263. ff. 


3 Her. Fab., I. xiv. 
139 


140 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


supreme. But his mother, Wisdom, reproves his pride, 
saying unto him: “Lie not, Ialdabadth, for above thee 
is the Father of All, First Man, and Man Son of Man.” ! 


THE ‘“‘ PHILOSOPHUMENA” OF HIPPOLYTUS 


But the main source of our information on this 
Anthrépos tradition, in its Christianised Gnostic form, 
is to be found in Hippolytus’ Philosophumena ; or, 
Refutation of all Heresies. 

In 1842, Minoides Mynas, a learned Greek, sent on 
a literary mission by the French Government, dis- 
covered in one of the monasteries on Mount Athos the 
only MS. (generally ascribed to the fourteenth century) 
which we possess of this extremely valuable work. It 
was originally in ten books, but, unfortunately, the first 
three and the beginning of the fourth are missing from 
our MS. The first book, however, was already known, 
though previously erroneously ascribed to Origen, and 
was accordingly prefixed to the text of the editio princeps 
of our work by Emmanuel Miller (Oxford, 1851). 

The missing Books II. and III. dealt respectively 
with the doctrines and mysteries of the Egyptians and 
with those of the Chaldeans. Hippolytus (Procem.) 
boasts that he has divulged all their mysteries, as well 
as the secrets of those Christian mystics whom he 
stigmatises as heretics, and to whom he devotes 
Books V.-IX. 

It is a curious fact that it is precisely those Books 
wherein this divulging of the Mysteries was attempted, 
which should be missing; not only have they dis- 
appeared, but in the Epitome at the beginning of 
Book X. the summary of their contents is also omitted. 
This seems almost to point to a deliberate removal of just 


1 FF. F., pp. 188 ff. 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 141 


that information which would be of priceless value to 
us to-day, not only for the general history of the 
evolution of religious ideas, but also for filling in an 
important part of the background of the environment 
of infant Christianity. 

Why, then, were these books cut out? Were the 
subsequent Christian Orthodox deterred by religious 
seruples, or were they afraid to circulate this informa- 
tion? Hippolytus himself seems to have had no such 
hesitation; he is ever delightedly boasting that he is 
giving away to the multitude the most sacred secrets of 
others ; it seems to have been his special métier to ery 
aloud on the house-tops what had been whispered in 
their secret chambers. It was for him a delicious 
triumph over “error” to boast, “I have your secret 
documents, and I am going to publish them !” 

Why, then, should those who came after him 
hesitate? Surely they were like-minded with Hip- 
polytus, and would have been as delighted as himself in 
humbling the pride of the hated Mystery-institutions 
in the dust? Can it possibly be that they saw far more 
clearly than he did that quite other deductions might | 
be drawn from his “startling revelations ” ? 


THE NAASSENES 


That far other deductions could be drawn from the 
Mystery-rites and Mystery-myths was at anyrate the 
view of a tradition of early Jewish and Christian mystics 
whom Hippolytus calls Naassenes. The claim of 
these Gnostics was practically that Christianity, or 
rather the Good News of the Christ, was precisely the 
consummation of the inner doctrine of the Mystery- 
institutions of all the nations; the end of them all was 
the revelation of the Mystery of Man. 


142 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


It is further to be noticed that these Naassenes, “ who 
call themselves Gnostics ” (v. 2), are the very first school 
of Christian “heresy” with which Hippolytus deals; 
he puts them in the forefront of his Hefutation, as 
being, presumably, in his opinion, the oldest, or, at any- 
rate, as representing the most ancient form of Christian 
“heresy.” 

Although the name Naassene (Naaconvoi) is derived 
from the Hebrew Nahash (Serpent), Hippolytus does 
not call them Ophites; indeed, he reserves the latter 
name to a body to which he also gives (viii. 20) the 
name Cainites and Nochaite (Noxairai)—? Nachaite, 
again, from Nachash'—and considers them of not 
sufficient importance for further mention. 

These Naassenes possessed many secret books or 
apocrypha—that is, books kept back from general 
circulation—and also regarded as authoritative the 
following scriptures: The Gospel of Perfection, The 
Gospel of Eve, The Questions of Mary, Concerning the 
Offspring of Mary, The Gospel of Philip, The Gospel 
according to Thomas, and The Gospel according to the 
Egyptians. All of which points somewhat to an 
Alexandrian or Egyptian circle. 


ANALYsIS OF HippoLytus’ ACCOUNT OF THE 
NAASSENE DOCUMENT 


One of their secret MSS. had fallen into the hands of 
Hippolytus. It is in the Bishop of Portus’ quotations 


1 Both & and ch being transliteration devices for the same 
Hebrew letter n in the word wn. 

2 We know of the two titles, The Greater and The Lesser 
Questions of Mary; the general title is thought by some to be 
the proper designation of one of the sources of the composite 
document known as Pistis Sophia, and has been suggested as its 
more appropriate general epigraph. 


ea ee 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 143 


from this document that Reitzenstein (pp. 81 ff.) seeks 
to discover what he calls the “‘ Hellenistic Myth of the 
God Anthrépos.” His theory is that, by eliminating 
the Christian citations and thoughts of the Naassene 
writer, we are face to face with a purely Heathen 
document. 

The reproduction of their views, as given by Hippo- 
lytus,! falls according to Reitzenstein into three divisions. 

(i.) The first begins with the explanation of the name 
“ Naassene” (S. 131, 1; C. 139, 1%), and, after giving a 
few brief headings, ends (S. 134, 8; C. 141, 2) with the 
statement that the writer of the MS. said they had 
their tradition from James, the Brother of the Lord, who 
had delivered it to Mariamné. 

(iii) The third begins (S. 170, 64; C. 178, 1) with 
another explanation of the name. In both of these 
parts are found remains of hymns from some liturgical 
collection. 

(ii.) Between i. and ii. lies a longer exposition in 
which Hippolytus tries to show that the Naassene 
doctrines are taken from the Mysteries, culminating in 
the assertion that the Naassenes, as a matter of fact, 
were nothing else than sectaries of the Mysteries of the 
Mother of the Gods, in proof of which he quotes at 
length from a secret document of their school. 

Our interest in these quotations, however, is very 
different from that of Hippolytus, for, as Reitzenstein 
has now shown, it is manifest on inspection that the 
Christian quotations and thoughts in this document 


1 Philos., v.1-11, of which I published a preliminary translation, 
under the heading “ Selections from the ‘ Philosophumena,’” in 
The Theosophical Review (August and September 1893), xii. 559- 
569, xiii. 42-52, and a summary in F. F. F., pp. 198-206. 

* Ed, L. Duncker and F. G. Schneidewin (Gottingen, 1859) ; 
and ed. P, Cruice (Paris, 1860). 


144 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


violently disrupt its underlying continuity, and that 
they are for the most part easily removable without 
damage to the sense. 

With regard to the Old Testament quotations it is 
not always so easy to disentangle them from the 
Hellenistic source, much less from the New Testament 
quotations; the phenomena, however, presented by 
them are of such a nature that, in my opinion, there is 
ample evidence before us that there was a Jewish 
working-over of the matter before it came into the 
hands of the Christian overwriter. Reitzenstein, how- 
ever, does not venture so far. 

Even, then, if we were content with Reitzenstein’s 
analysis only, it is quite clear that the quotations from 
the Old Testament formed no part of the original; and 
that we have, therefore, before us what was once a purely 
Heathen text, with Gnostic Christian scholia, or rather 
overworked by a Christian Gnostic. The original Pagan 
text had, accordingly, been cut up by the Naassene 
overwriter before ever it came into the hands of 
Hippolytus. 

Now, as the Christianised text must have been 
for some time in private circulation before it reached 
the library of the Bishop of Portus’—even if we make 
no allowance for a Jewish Hellenistic stratum of over- 
writing, still seeing that Hippolytus’ own view was 
that, in the Naassene MS., he had before him a basic 
document of those whom he regarded as the earliest 
Christian “ heretics ”—it is quite evident that if we were 
to place the date of the original Hellenistic source in 
the first century, we should not be doing violence even 
to the ecclesiastical traditional absurdity that Gnosti- 
cism first sullied the orthodox purity of the Church only 


1 The date of the writing of the Philosophwmena is placed some- 
where about 222 a,D. 


ere ee 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 145 


in the reign of Trajan (96-117 a.D.). But we will re- 
turn to the question of date later on. 

As the whole matter is not only one of considerable 
interest for the student of our treatises, but also of the 
greatest importance for the student of the history of 
Gnosticism, I shall give a translation of Hippolytus’ 
introductory and concluding sections, as well as of the 
intermediate section which specially concerns us, so that 
the reader may have a view of the whole medley as it 
comes to us from the hands of the heresy-hunting bishop. 

I shall, moreover, proceed a stage further in the 
analysis of the material of Hippolytus than Reitzenstein 
has done, and hope, when the evidence has been laid 
before the reader, to win his assent to what appears to 
me to be the natural sifting out of the various elements, 
with resultant phenomena which are of the greatest 
importance for the history of Gnosticism, and, therefore, 
of the evolution of Christian dogmatics, and which 
lead to conclusions that are far too serious to be treated 
in the short space of a single chapter of our present 
essay. 

In the following analysis H. stands for Hippolytus; 
C. for the Christian Gnostic final overwriter, the “ Naas- 
sene” whose MS. lay before H.; J. for the Naassene 
Jewish mystic who preceded C, and overworked the 
original; 8, for the original Heathen Hellenistic Source. 

As H., and C. are of secondary importance for our 
immediate enquiry, though of themselves of the 
greatest value and interest, I shall print them in smaller 
type. J. I shall print in the same type as S., as 
nearer in contact with 8. than C.,and as being some- 
times more difficult to detach from S. than from C. 

The reader, to have the text of Hippolytus before 
him, must neglect all the critical indications and read 
straight on. 

VOL. [, 10 


146 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


With these brief preliminary indications we will, 
then, present the reader with a translation of the first 
section, or introductory part,! of Hippolytus’ exposure 
or exposition of the Naassene doctrines, begging him to 
remember throughout that it is a portrait painted by 
the hand of one of their bitterest foes. 


Hippotytus’ INTRODUCTION 


H. The priests and chiefs of [this] doctrine? were first of all 
those who were called Naasseni—so named in Hebrew, [in 
which] “serpent” is called naas.* But subsequently they called 
themselves Gnostics, pretending that they alone knew the Depths. 

From these many separated themselves and [so] turned the 
school, which was originally a single one, into numerous sects, 
setting forth the same ideas in various doctrinal forms, as our 
argument will show as it advances. 

These [Naassenes] honour as the Logos (Reason) of all 
universals Man, and Son of Man. This Man is male-female, and 
is called by them Adamas.° And they have many intricate ® hymns 
in his honour. These hymns—to dispose of them briefly—run 
somewhat as follows : 


J. “‘From Thee’ [is] Father, and ‘Through Thee’? 
Mother—the two Immortal Names* Parents of ons, 
O Thou who hast the Heaven for Thy City, O Man of 
Mighty Names,” ? 


1 §, 132, 1—134, 80; C. 139, 1—141, 2. 

2 The worship of the serpent, according to H. 

3 Cf. the strange logos, preserved in Matt. x.16 alone: “Be ye 
therefore wise as serpents.” 

4 The reading can be slightly emended by H.’s epitome in 
x. 9; but the phrase rapa rdv adray Adyoy still remains an enigma, 

5 The Celestial Adam, the Adam Kadmon of Kabalistic 
tradition, or the Intelligible Cosmos of Hellenistic theology. 
See Cruice, note in loc. 

° Or hymns of subtle meaning. 

? That is, Man as Cause and Substance of all things. 

8 Sc, Powers. 

® That is, presumably, “ names of power” (Egyptice) ; the Adam 
who gave their “names” to all the “animals.” 


Ne a Os ree 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 147 


H. And they divide him into three, like Gérydnés ;! for, they 
say, he has a mental, psychic, and choice [aspect];? and they 
think that the Gnosis of? this [Man] is the beginning of the 


possibility of knowing God, saying : 


J. The beginning of Perfection [is] the Gnosis of Man, 
but the Gnosis of God is perfected Perfection.‘ 


H. All these, he says°—mental, psychic, and earthy —descended 
together into one man—Jesus, born of Mary. 

And these three Men, he says, spake each from their own 
special essences to their own special folk. 

For of the universal principles there are three kinds [or races] 
—the angelic, psychic, and earthy ; and three churches—angelic, 
psychic, and earthy—named the Elect, Called, and Bound. 

These are the chief heads from a very large number of 
doctrines,® which, he says, James, the Brother of the Lord, handed 
on to Mariamné,’ 


1 Geryon, the triple-headed or triple-bodied Giant, who plays 
a prominent part in the myth of Hercules. 

2 Or spiritual, psychic, and earthy. 

3 That is, the learning to know. 

* Of. § 25, J. 

5 That is, as we shall see later, C. 

6 Adywr. 

7 Celsus (c. 150-175 a.D.) knows of groups of Harpocratians— 
that is, worshippers of Horus—some of whom derived their 
tradition from Salémé, others from Mariamné, and others again 
from Martha (Origen, C, Celswm, v. 62). This suggests an 
Egyptian setting. (For Salome and Maria or Miriam (Mariamné), 
the Sisters of Jesus, see D. J. L., 405 f. ; for Martha, Our Lady, see 
abid., 375 ff.) In the Gnostic Acts of Philip, Mariamné, or 
Mariammé (both forms being found in the MSS., according to 
R. A. Lipsius, Die apokr. Apostelgeschichten—Brunswick, 1884— 
iii, 12), is the “ virgin sister” of Philip, and plays an important 
réle as prophetess. She is to Philip as Thekla to Paul, or Helen 
to Simon. Compare with this the “sister wife” whom Paul 
demands the right to take about like “ the rest of the Apostles and 
the Brethren of the Lord and Cephas” (1 Corinth. ix. 5; D.J. L., 
229). Salmon (art. “ Mariamne” in Smith and Wace’s D. of Christ. 
Biog., iii. 830) refers to the Mary (Magdalene) of the Pistis Sophia, 
the chief questioner of the Master and His favourite disciple, the 


148 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


But in order that we may put an end to the lying accounts of 
these impious [heretics] concerning Mariamné, and James, and the 
Saviour Himself,! let us come to the Initiations from which 
they get this myth—if you like [to call it so]—to the non-Grecian 
and Grecian [Initiations]; and let us see how, by combining 
together the secret Mysteries of all the Gentiles which must not 
be spoken of, and by telling lies about the Christ, they take in 
those who do not know that these things are the Orgies of the 
Gentiles. 

Now, since the foundation of their system is Man Adamas, 
and they say it has been written of him, “ Who shall declare his 
generation ?” 2—learn how they have taken the undiscoverable and 
contradictory generation of Man and plastered it on the Christ. 


THE MATERIAL FOR THE RECOVERY OF THE ORIGINAL 
HELLENISTIC DOCUMENT 


(1) S. “ Earth (say the Greeks *) first brought forth 
Man—bearing a fair gift, desiring to be mother 
not of plants without feeling, nor of brutes without 
reason, but of a tamed God-loving life. 

“ Difficult is it (H. he says*) to discover whether 
it was among the Beotians that Alalkomeneus rose 
from the Kephisian Lake as first of men; or whether 


sister of Martha. The tradition of the Gnosis from James, the 
Brother of the Lord, is asserted by Clement of Alexandria in 
Book VI. of his lost work, The Institutions, where he writes: 
‘‘The Lord imparted the Gnosis to James the Just, to John and 
Peter, after His resurrection ; these delivered it to the rest of the 
Apostles, and they to the Seventy” (Euseb., Hist. Hecles., ii. 1 ; 
of. D. J. L., 226). 

1 From here onwards we use the revised critical text of Reitzen- 
stein (pp. 83-98), who appends what we may call an apparatus 
criticus of the emendations and conjectures of the various editions 
of our solitary MS. R., as usual, however, gives no translation. 

2 Is. lili. 8—same reading as LXX. (Cf. also § 25 J. 

3 A remark of the writer of S., which, as we shall see at the end, 
is divided into Texts and Commentary. 

4 The “he says” may be ascribed to any subsequent hand ; I 
have marked them all H. to avoid further complication, 


ee. a 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 149 


it was the Idean Kurétes, race divine, or the Phrygian 
Korybantes, whom Helios saw first sprouting forth 
tree-like; or whether Arkadia brought forth Pelasgos 
[first], older than the Moon; or Eleusis Diaulos, dweller 
in Raria; or Lémnos Kabeiros, fair child of ineffable 
orgies;! or whether Palléné Phlegrean Alkyoneus, 
eldest of Giants. 

“ The Libyans say that Garamas,’ rising from parched 
plains, first picked sweet date of Zeus; while Neilos, 
making fat the mud of Egypt to this day (H. he 
says), breeds living things, and renders from damp heat 
things clothed in flesh.” * 

The Assyrians say it was with them Oannés, the 
Fish-eater; while the Chaldeans [say that it was] 
Adam. 

(2) J. And this Adam they [the Chaldeans] say was 
the man that Earth produced—a body only, and that 
he lay breathless, motionless, immovable, like a statue, 
being an image of that Man Above— 


1 “ Burstings forth,” inspirations, revealings, or mysteries. 

2 In Greek transformation, son of Apollo and the daughter 
of Minos, born in Libya. This points to a very ancient myth- 
connection with the old Cretan civilisation. Garamas was also 
called Amphithemis (q.v. in Roscher’s Lex.) ; he appears also, ac- 
cording to one tradition, to have been the father of Ammon, (See 
“Garamantis Nympha,” ibid.) 

3 This passage is doubly interesting, for it is not only a source, 
but a source within a source, Already a number of scholars have 
recognised it as an Ode; and not only so, but conjectured with 
much probability that it is by no less a master than Pindar himself. 
Nay, further, it is part of a Hymn to Jupiter Ammon—an 
additionally interesting point for us as showing strong Egyptian 
influence. It is true that in our text of Hippolytus the order of 


__ the words has been frequently changed to bring it into prose form ; 


but the reconstruction of most of it is not difficult, and quite 
convincing. I translate from the text of Bergk’s final revision, as 
given S. 134, 135; C. 142. R., for some reason or other, does not 
refer to this interesting side-light. 


150 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


H. —of whom they sing, and brought into existence by the 
many Powers,! concerning which there is much detailed teaching. 


J. In order, then, that the Great Man from Above— 


C. From whom, as is said, every fatherhood has its name on 
earth or in the heavens? 


J. —might be completely brought low, there was 
given unto him® Soul also, in order that through the 
Soul the enclosed plasm of the Great, Most-fair, and 
Perfect Man might suffer and be chastened. 

H. For thus they call Him. They seek to discover then 
further what is the Soul, and whence, and of what nature, that by 
entering into man and moving him, it should enslave and chasten 
the plasm of the Perfect Man ; but they seek this also not from 
the Scriptures, but from the Mysteries. 

(3) S. And they‘ say that Soul is very difficult to 
discover, and hard to understand ; for it never remains 
of the same appearance, or form, or in the same state, 
so that one can describe it by a general type,> or com- 
prehend it by an essential quality. 


H. These variegated metamorphoses they ® have laid down in 
the Gospel, superscribed “ According to the Egyptians.” 7 


S. They are accordingly in doubt— 
H. —like all the rest of the Gentiles— 


J. —whether it [sc. the Soul] is from the Pre-existing 
[One], or from the Self-begotten, or from the Streaming 
Chaos.® 


1 Se. of the Fate-Sphere. 

2 This looks back, though with variants, to Ephes. iii, 15. 

3 Sc, the image-man, or Adam of “red” earth. — 

4 Sc. the Chaldeans, 

5 rim. 

8 Sc. the Naassenes, 

7 This is a further indication of the environment of the Naas. 
senes, Of. C. H., x. (xi.) 7. 

8 That is from Man (Father), Man Son of Man (Son), or Flow- 
ing Chaos (Mother)—corresponding in Hellenic mythology to 


——— 


Se 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 151 


H. And first of all, in considering the triple division of Man, 
they fly for help to the Initiations of the Assyrians ; for the 
Assyrians were the first to consider the Soul triple and [yet] 
one. 


(4) S. Now every nature (H. he says) yearns after 


Soul—one in one way and another in another. 


For Soul is cause of all in Genesis. All things that 
are sustained and grow (H. he says) need Soul. 
Indeed, no sustenance (H. he says) or growth is 
possible without the presence of Soul. 

Nay, even stones (H. he says) are ensouled;! for 
they have the power of increase [or growth]; and 
growth could not take place without sustenance; 
for it is by addition that things which increase 
grow; and addition is the sustenance of that which is 


_ gustained.? 


(5) Now the Assyrians call this [Mystery] Adonis 
(or Endymion). And whenever it is called Addnis 
(H. he says), it is Aphrodité who is in love with and 
desires Soul so-called. 


H. And Aphrodité is Genesis according to them.? 


But when Persephoné (that is, Koré) is in love with 
Adénis, Soul becomes subject to Death, separated from 


Aphrodité (that is, from Genesis). 
But if Selené is impassioned of Endymion, and is in 


Kronos, Zeus, and Rhea, For Rhea (from péew, “to flow ”) is the 
Moist or Liquid Nature, as with the Stoics ; she is the a-cosmic 
or unordered Earth, the Prima Materia (the First Earth, the 
Spouse of Heaven—Uranus), Hyle Proper, who carries in her 
bosom the Logos. For references, see R., p. 99, n. 2. 

1 Of. Ex. viii, 8. 

2 The preceding paragraph is evidently composed of selections 
fromS. R. (p. 85, n. 1) thinks that we have here the description 
of only one aspect of Soul, and that the description of the 
remaining two aspects has been omitted by H. 

3 Sc. the Naassenes, in H.,’s view. 


152 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


love with [formal] beauty,! it is the Nature of the 
higher [spaces 2] (H. he says) which desires Soul. 

(6%) But if (H. he says) the Mother of the Gods 
emasculate Attis—she, too, regarding him as the object 
of her love—it is the Blessed Nature Above of the 
supercosmic and zonian [spaces] which calls back the 
masculine power of Soul to herself.* 


H. For Man, he says, is male-female. According, then, to this 
theory of theirs, the intercourse between man and woman is 
exhibited as most mischievous, and is forbidden according to 
their teaching. 


J. For Attis (H. he says) is emasculated—that is 
[Soul is separated] from the earthy parts of the creation 
[tending] downwards, and ascends in quest of the 
Eonian Essence Above— 


1 yoppjs-—lit., either form or beauty. 

2 Sc. of cosmos. 

3 This paragraph and § 7, together with the accompanying 
overworkings, seem to have been misplaced by H., according to 
R. (pp. 99, 100). 

The sudden introduction of the name Attis without any prelimin- 
aries, indicates another lacuna ; the transition from the Assyrian 
to the Phrygian Mysteries of the Great Mother is too brusque. 

4 The threefold nature of the Soul is thus distinguished by : 
(i.) The union (or marriage) which joins it to generation, or to earth- 
life—the nature of things on earth ; (ii.) The union which joins 
it with death—the nature of the things “beneath” the earth ; 
(iii.) The union which joins it with formal beauty, or beauty in 
form (uop¢4)—the nature of super-terrene (or sublunary) things, 
here regarded as the Elysian state, 

The love of the Mother of the Gods for the Soul represents the 
“ fourth state” (the turiya of Vedantic mystic psychology), or the 
absorption of the masculine power of the Soul by its own higher 
Feminine Nature. Cf. in Damascius’ “ Life of Isidorus” (Photius, 
Bibl., ed. Bekker, 345 a. 5: “I fell asleep, and in a vision Attis 
seemed to appear to me, and, on behalf of the Mother of the 
Gods, to initiate me into the feast called Hilaria—a mystery 
which discloses the way of our salvation from Hades.” Hades, 
the realm of Seléné, is not Tartarus, the realm of Death. 


dE canes el 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 1538 


C. —where (H. he says) is “ neither male nor female,”! but a 
new creature, a new man, who is male-female. 

H. What they call “ Above” I will explain when I come to 
the proper place. And they say that this theory is supported not 
simply by [the myth] of Rhea, but also, to put it briefly, by 
universal creation. 

Nay, they make out that this is [even] what was said by the 
Word (Logos) :? 

C. “For the invisible* things of Him [God]—namely, His 
Eternal* Power and Godhead—are clearly seen from the creation 
of the world, being understood by His things that are made ; so 
that they [men] are without excuse. Because that, though 
knowing God, they glorified Him not as God, nor did they give 
[Him] thanks, but their non-understanding heart was made foolish.® 


1 Compare the so-called Second Epistle of Clement (an early 
homily incorporating extra-canonical Gospel-materials), xii. 2: 
“For the Lord Himself being asked by some one when his King- 
dom should come, said: When the two shall be one, and the 
outside as the inside, and the male with the female neither male 
nor female”; and also the well-known logoi, from The Gospel 
according to the Egyptians, quoted several times by Clement of 
Alexandria: “When Salome asked how long Death should 
prevail, the Lord said: So long as ye women bear children ; for 
I am come to destroy the work of the Female. And Salome said 
to Him: Did I therefore well in bearing no children? The Lord 
answered and said: Eat every Herb, but eat not that which hath 
bitterness. When Salome asked when these things about which 
she questioned should be made known, the Lord said: When ye 
trample upon the Garment of Shame ; when the Two become One, 
and Male with Female neither male nor female.” And with the 
last logos of the above compare the new-found fragment of a lost 
Gospel: “His disciples say unto Him: When wilt thou be 
manifest to us, and when shall we see Thee? He saith: When ye 
shall be stripped and not be ashamed,”—Grenfell and Hunt, New 
Sayings of Jesus (London, 1904), p, 40. The environment is 
Egyptian and ascetic ; it is a saying addressed to a community, 
as may be seen from one of the previous logot: “ Having one 
garment what do ye [lack] ?” 

2 See Rom. i, 20-23, 25-27. 

3 adpara. 

4 atd1os—evidently a word-play. 

5 The received Pauline text is slightly shortened here. 


154 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“ Professing themselves to be wise, they convicted themselves 
of folly, and changed the Glory of the Incorruptible God into the 
likeness of an image of corruptible man, and of birds, and of 
four-footed beasts, and creeping things... 2 

“Wherefore also God gave them up to passions of dishonour ; 
for both their females did change their natural use to that which 
is against nature— 

H. And what the natural use is, according to them, we will say 
later on. 

C. —“and likewise also their males, leaving the natural use of 
the female, burned in their lust for one another, males with males 
working unseemliness 3— 

H. And “unseemliness,” according to them, is the First and 
Blessed Formless Essence, the Cause of all forms for things 
enformed.* 

C, —“and receiving in themselves the recompense of their 
Error which was meet.” 

H. For in these words which Paul spake is contained, they say, 
the whole of their hidden and ineffable Mystery of the Blessed Bliss. 

For what is promised by the [rite of the] bath ° is nothing else, 
according to them, than the introduction into Unfading Bliss of 
him who, according to them, is washed with Living Water, and 
anointed with the Chrism that no tongue can declare.® 


1 Evidently a reference to the Chaldean fourfold (man-eagle- 
lion-bull) glyph of what Later Orphicism and Platonism called 
the Autozdon, representing the four main types of Animal 
Life ; the same mystery which Ezekiel saw in the Vision of the 
Mercabah, or Celestial Chariot—a reflected picture, I believe, 
from the Chaldean Mysteries. 

2 Verses 24 and 25 of the Received Text are omitted. 

3 &o-xnunootvn—meaning also “ formlessness.” 

4 Of, Ex. v. 2. 

5 That is, baptism. 

6 We wonder what “they” really did say? They may have 
argued in their private circles that even in the foulest things the 
clean soul could recognise the reversed signs of the Mysteries of 
Purity ; for certainly these things require an explanation—nay, 
more urgently do they require an interpretation in proportion to 
their foulness, The hateful suggestion of Hippolytus that these 
ascetic and spiritually-minded folk—for their doctrines plainly 
show them to be so—were as foul as those of the Flood, only 
shows the ineradicable prejudice of unwitting self-righteousness. 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 155 


(7) And they say that not only the Mysteries of the Assyrians 
and Phrygians substantiate this teaching (logos) concerning the 
Blessed Nature, which is at once hidden and manifest [but also 
those of the Egyptians? J. 

C.2 [The Nature] which (H. he says) is the Kingdom of the 
Heavens sought for within man— 

H. —concerning which [Nature] they hand on a distinct 
tradition in the Gospel entitled According to Thomas, saying as 
follows : 

C. “He who seeketh shall find me in children from the age 
of seven years? ; for in them at the fourteenth year ‘ [lit. eon] I 
hidden am made manifest.” 

H. But this is not Christ’s Saying but that of Hippocrates : 

“ A boy of seven years [is] half a father.” 5 

Hence as they place the Original Nature of the universals 
in the Original Seed, having learned the Hippocratian dictum 
that a child of seven is half a father, they say at fourteen years, 
according to Thomas, it is manifested. This® is their ineffable 
and mysterious Logos.” 


(88) S. (H.—At anyrate they say that) the Egyptians 
—who are the most ancient of men after the Phrygians, 
who at the same time were confessedly the first to 
communicate to mankind the Mystery-rites and Orgies 
of all the Gods, and to declare their Forms and Energies 
—have the mysteries of Isis, holy, venerable, and not to 
be disclosed to the uninitiated. 


1 Completion of R. 

2 Picking up “Blessed Nature” from the first paragraph 
of § 6. ’ 

; Of. Ex. viii. 6, note. 

4 At fourteen a boy took his first initiation into the Egyptian 
priesthood, 

5 Of, Littré, Traduct. des Huvres d@ Hippocrate, tom. i. p. 396. 

6 Presumably referring to Seed. 

7 Perhaps, however, they meant something very different, and 
perhaps even their analogies are not so foolish as they seemed 
to H. 

8 The material here seems to follow directly on §5. Itis a 
summary by H. ; but seeing that there is more in it of S. than of 
H., we will print it as S., indicating H. when possible. 


156 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


H. And these are nothing else than the robbing of the member 


of Osiris, and its being sought for by the seven-robed and black- _ 


mantled ! [Goddess]. 


And (they [the Egyptians] say) Osiris is Water.’ 
And Seven-robed Nature— 


H, —having round her, nay, robing herself in seven etheric 
vestures—for thus they ® allegorically designate the planet-stars, 
ealling [their spheres] etheric vestures— 


S. —being metamorphosed, as ever-changing Genesis, 
by the Ineffable and Uncopiable and Incomprehensible 
and Formless, is shown forth as creation. 

J. And this is what (H. he says) is said in the 
Scripture : 

“Seven times the Just shall fall and rise again.’ 

For these “fallings” (H. he says) are the changes 
of the stars,> set in motion by the Mover of all 
things. 


(9) S. Accordingly they® declare concerning the 
Essence of the Seed which is the cause of all things in 


1 Isis, or Nature, as the seven spheres and the eighth sphere 
(? the “black” earth), 

2 That is the Celestial Nile or Heaven-Ocean, which fructifies 
Mother Nature. “The Alexandrians honoured the same God as 
being both Osiris and Adonis, according to their mystical god- 
blending (syncrasia).” Damascius, “Life of Isidorus” (Phot., 
Bibl., 242 ; p. 342 a. 21, ed. Bek.). 

3 Sc. the Egyptians. 

4 Prov. xxiv. 16—same reading as LXX. (Cf. Luke xvii. 4.: 
“Tf he trespass against thee seven times in a day and turn again 
to thee, saying, ‘I repent’; thou shalt forgive.” This saying is 
apparently from the “Logia” source; of. Matt. xviii. 21, and 
compare the idea with the scheme of the “repentance” of the 
Pistis Sophia. 

5 The seven planetary spheres; but it may also connect with 
the idea of the falling “stars” as the souls descending into 
matter, according to the Platonic and Hermetic doctrine. 

6 Probably the Egyptians in their Mysteries, connecting with 
what is summarised by H. at end of § 6 and beginning of § 7. 


vie 
ee 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 157 


Genesis, that it is none of these things, but that it 
begets and makes all generated things, saying: 

“T become what I will, and am what I am.”! 

Therefore (H. he says) That which moves all is 
unmoved ; for It remains what It is, making all things, 
and becomes no one of the things produced. 

(H. He says that) This is the Only Good— 


C. And concerning this was spoken what was said by the 


Saviour : 


“ Why callest thou me Good? One is Good?—my Father in 
the Heavens, who maketh His sun to rise on righteous and 
unrighteous, and sendeth rain on saints and sinners.” * 

H. And who are the saints on whom He sendeth rain and the 
sinners on whom He also sendeth rain—this also he tells subse- 
quently with the rest. 


S. —and (H. that) This is the Great, Hidden, and 
Unknown Mystery of the Egyptians, Hidden and [yet] 
Revealed. 


For there is no temple (H. he says) before the 


1 Evidently a logos from some Hellenistic scripture. In the 
evidence of Zosimus which we adduce at the end of our Tris- 
megistic Fragments, he quotes (§§ 15 and 7) from the “ Inner 
Door”—a lost treatise of Hermes Trismegistus—as follows : “ For 
that the Son of God having power in all things, becoming all 
things that He willeth, appeareth as He willeth to each.” Thus 
we have S. quoting the original logos, which, I suggest, belongs to 
the “ Pcemandres” type of Trismegistic literature. Therefore 
that type was in existence before 8. This confirms our attribu- 
tion of the “they declare” to the Egyptians and their Mysteries 
(Trismegisticism being principally the Hellenised form of those 
Mysteries), and also the completion of R. at the end of the first 
paragraph of § 7 above. 

2 Of. Matt. xix. 17=Mark x. 18=Luke xviii. 19. The first 
clause agrees with Mark and Luke, the second with Matthew 
(omitting ‘‘the” before “Good”). The presumably primitive 
reading of the positive command, “Call me not Good,” has dis- 
appeared entirely from this phase of tradition. 

3 A different form from Matt. v. 45, but the same idea; for 
the other tradition, see Luke vi. 35. 


158 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


entrance of which the Hidden [Mystery] does not 
stand naked, pointing from below above, and crowned 
with all its fruits of generation. 

(10) And (H. they say) it stands so symbolised 
not only in the most sacred temples before the statues, 
but also set up for general knowledge— 

C. —as it were “a light not under the bushel, but” set 
“on the candlestick”'—a preaching “heralded forth on the 
house-tops.” ? 

S. —on all the roads and in all the streets, and along- 
side the very houses as a boundary and limit of the 
dwelling; (H. that) This is the God spoken of by 
all, for they call Him Bringer-of-good, not knowing what 
they say. 

H. And this mystery[-symbol] the Greeks got from the 
Egyptians, and have it [even] to this day. 

At anyrate, he says, we see the “ Hermes”? honoured by them 
in this form. 


(11) S. And the Cyllenians, treating [this symbol] 
with special honour, [regard it as the] Logos. 

For (H. he says) Hermes is [the] Logos, who, as 
being the Interpreter and Fabricator of all things that 
have been and are and shall be, was honoured by them 
under the symbolism of this figure, namely an ithy- 
phallus. 

And that he (H. that is Hermes, so symbolised) is 


1 Of. Matt. v. 15= Mark iv. 21=Luke viii. 16 and xi.. 33. 

2 Of. Matt. x, 27=Luke xii. 3. 

3 That is, symbolically distinguished statues of Hermes. 

4 The text is faulty ; but compare Pausanias, VI. xxvi. 5, where, 
speaking of Cyllene, he says: “ The image of Hermes which the 
people of the place revere exceedingly, is nothing but an ithy- 
phallus on a pedestal.” This famous symbolic figure at Cyllene 
is mentioned also by Artemidorus, Onetrocr., i. 45 ; and by Lucian, 
Jupiter Tragedus, 42. Of, J. G. Frazer’s Pausanias (London, 
1898), iv. 110. 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 159 


Conductor and Reconductor of souls, and Cause of 
souls, has not escaped the notice of the poets (H. of the 
Gentiles), when saying: 


“ But Cyllenian Hermes summoned forth the souls 
Of men mindful ” 2— 


—not the “suitors” of Penelope (H. he says), hapless 
wights! but of those who are roused from sleep, and 
have their memory restored to them— 


“From what honour and [how great] degree of 
blessedness.” * 


J. That is, from the Blessed Man Above— 

H. —or Original Man, or Adamas, as they‘ think— 

J.—they® have been thus brought down into the 
plasm of clay, in order that they may be enslaved to 
the Demiurge of this creation, Esaldaios °— 


H, —a fiery God, fourth in number, for thus they call the 
Demiurge and Father of this special cosmos.’ 


1 Psychagogue and psychopomp—or leader and evoker of souls 
—apparently here meaning him who takes souls out of body and 
brings them back again to it. 

2 uvnorhpwy—lit., meaning “recalling to mind”; and also 
“suitors.” Of. Od., xxiv. 1 ff. 

3 Empedocles, On Purifications (Diels, 119 ; Stein, 390 ; Karsten, 
11; Fairbanks, First Philosophers of Greece, 206); Empedocles 


continues; “ . . . have I fallen here on the earth to consort with 
mortals !” 

* The Naassenes, in H.’s opinion, 

5 The souls, 


6 Some editors think this is a mistake for Ialdabadth, The 
name, however, appears in the system of Justinus (Hipp., Philos., 
_y. 26) as Esaddaios, evidently the transliteration of El Shaddai, 
as one of the twelve Paternal Angels, the Sons of Elohim, the 
Demiurge of the sensible world, and of Eden, the Maternal 
Potency or Nature. 

7 “rod iikod xécuov—the cosmos of species and not of wholes, 
Of. § 17 below for the passage of C, from which H. takes this. 


160 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


(13) S. “ And he! holds a rod in his hands, 


Beautiful, golden; and with it he spell-binds the 
eyes of men, 

Whomsoever he would, and wakes them again too 
from sleep.” 2 


This (H. he says) is He who alone hath the power 
of life and death? 

J. Concerning Him it is written: “Thou shalt 
shepherd them with a rod of iron.” ¢ 

But the poet (H. he says), wishing to embellish the 
incomprehensibility of the Blessed Nature of the Logos, 
bestowed upon Him a golden instead of an iron rod. 

S. “He spell-binds the eyes” of the dead (H. he says), 
and “wakes them again too from sleep”—those who 
are waked from sleep and become “ mindful.” ® 


C. Concerning them the Scripture saith: “Awake thou that 
sleepest, and rise, and Christ will give thee light.” ® 

This is the Christ, the Son of Man (H. he says), expressed in 
all who are born from the Logos, whom no expression can express. 


S. This (H. he says) is the Great Ineffable Mystery 
of the Eleusinia: “ Hye Kye.”’ 


Compare Ptah-Hephaistos, the Demiurge by Fire, the Fourth, in 
the Inscription of London given in Chap. Vi. above. 


1 Sc. Hermes. 

2 The continuation of the above quotation—Od., xxiv. 2 ff. 

3 Of. OC. H., i. 14: “he who hath power over the lives of 
cosmos.” 

4 Ps, ii. 9—same reading as LXX. 

5 Or “get back memory,” or “ become suitors.” 

8 Eph, v. 14—a shortened form of the present Pauline text ; 
Paul himself, however, seems to be quoting from some older 
writing. If the intermediate reading (érnatoe: for émipadcer) 
can stand (see W. H., Ap. 125), it would mean “Christ shall 
touch thee” with His rod. 

7 Of. Plutarch, De Is. et Os., xxxiv. After saying that Osiris, 
or the Logos, is symbolised as Ocean and Water, and that Thales 
took his idea of Primal Water, as the cause of things, from the 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 161 


J. And that (H. he says) all things have been put 
under Him, this too has been said: “ Into all the earth 
hath gone forth their sound.” 4 

(14) 8. And “Hermes leads them, moving his rod, 
and they follow, squeaking ” *—the souls in a cluster, as 
the poet hath shown in the following image: 


“ But as when bats into some awesome cave’s recess 
Fly squeaking—should one from out the cluster 
fall 


Down from the rock, they cling to one another.” ® 


J. The “rock” (H. he says) means Adamas. This 
(H. he says) is the “ corner-stone ”— 


Cc. —“that hath become the head of the corner.”* For in the 


Egyptians, the initiated priest of Apollo and learned comparative 
mythologist continues; “The Greeks say that ‘son’ (é:év) comes 
from ‘water’ (#daros) and ‘to moisten’ (ica), and they call 
Dionysus ‘Hyés’ (mv) as Lord of the Moist (éypis) Nature, he 
being the same as Osiris.” Stoll in Roscher’s Lex. (sub vv.) says 
that “Hyés” and “Hyé” were respectively designations of 
Dionysus and Semele, and that the meaning is the “ Moistener” 
and the “ Moistened” (references loc. cit.). The nymphs who 
reared Bacchus were also called Hyades (Pherecydes, 46; p. 108, 
ed. Sturz). Hyés was also a popular epithet of Zeus as god of 
rain, See also Lobeck, Aglaophamus, 782 and 1045 ff.; Anecd., 
Bekk., p. 202: Some say that Hyés=Attis, others that Hyés= 
Dionysus ; “for Zeus poured (ice) ambrosia upon him.” One of 
the names of Bacchus was Ambrosia (Pherecy., cbid.; Non., xxi. 
20). I would therefore suggest that the mystic cry “Hye Kye” 
meant “O Moistener beget !” 

1 Ps, xix. 4. That is the Sound (= Word) of the Heavens ; 
quoted also in Rom, x, 18. 

2 Of, Od., xxiv. 5. And compare also Hamlet, I. i. : 


“The sheeted dead 
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets.” 


3 Od., ibid. ff. 

4 Ps, exviii. 22, Quoted in Matt. xxi. 42; Mark xii. 10; 
Luke xx. 17; Acts iv, 11. 

VOL. L 11 


162 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“Head” is the expressive Brain! of the Essence, from which 
[Brain] “every fatherhood”? has its expression— 

J. —which “I insert in the foundation of Zion.” 

[By this] (H. he says) he* means, allegorically, 
the plasm of man. For the Adamas who is “ inserted ” 
is [the inner man, and the “ foundations of Zion” are *] 
the “ teeth ”—the “fence of the teeth,” as Homer says 
—the Wall and Palisade® in which is the inner man, 
fallen into it from the Primal Man, the Adamas Above 
—{the Stone] “cut without hands”? cutting it, and 
brought down into the plasm of forgetfulness, the 
earthy, clayey [plasm]. 

(15) S. And (H. he says that) they followed Him 
squeaking &—the souls, the Logos. __ 

“Thus they went squeaking together; and he led 
them on, 

Hermes, the guileless, down the dark ways.” ® 

That is, (H. he says) [He led them] into the eternal 
lands free from all guile. For where (H. he says) 
went they ? 

(16) “They passed by the streams of Ocean, and by 
the White Rock, 

By the Gates of the Sun, and the People of Dreams,” 

For He (H. he says) is Ocean—“birth-causing of 


1 Taken by C. from S. and J.,§ 20; but I think that C. has 
missed the true meaning of the “‘corner-stone” in the brain. 

2 Of, Eph. iii. 15. 

3 Is, xxviii. 16—reading évrdoow for éuBdarw of LXX.; quoted 
also in Eph. ii. 20 and 1 Pet. ii. 7, 

4 Sc. Isaiah. 

5 Completion of the lacuna by R. 

& xapdeoua—a technical term also-for the “Gnostic” supernal 
Horos or Boundary. | 

7 Dan. ii. 15, 

* Compare the “complaints of the souls” in the K.K. fragments, 

4 Od., xxiv. 9 f. 

0 Od., “bid. 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 163 


gods and birth-causing of men” 1—flowing and ebbing 
for ever, now up and now down. 

J. When Ocean flows down (H. he says), it is the 
birth-causing of men; and when [it flows] up, towards 
the Wall and Palisade, and the “ White Rock,’ it is 
the birth-causing of gods. 

This (H. he says) is what is written : 

“<T have said ye are Gods and all Sons of the 
Highest’ 2—if ye hasten to flee from Egypt and get you 
beyond the Red Sea into the Desert”; that is, from 
the intercourse below to the Jerusalem Above, who is 
the Mother of the Living.® “ But if ye turn back again 
into Egypt’—that is, to the intercourse below—“‘ ye 
shall die like men.’” 4 

For (H. he says) all the generation below is subject 
to death, but the [birth] begotten above is superior 
to death. 


C. For from water alone—that is, spirit—is begotten the 
spiritual [man], not the fleshly; the lower [man] is fleshly. 
That is (H. he says) what is written: “That which is born 
of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is 
spirit.” § 

H. This is their ® spiritual birth. 


J. This (H. he says) is the Great Jordan, which, 
flowing downwards and preventing the sons of Israel 


1 Of, Il., xiv. 201, 246 ; Hymn. Orph., 1xxxiii, 2. 

2 Ps, lxxxii, 6. 

3 Of. Gal. iv. 27: “But Jerusalem Above is free, which is 
our Mother.” (W. and H. text.) 

4 The final quotation within the quotation is also from Ps 
Ixxxii. 6. Here, then, we have a quotation from a seripture (“ what 
is written”), glossed by J. with his special exegesis, but already 
being an exegesis of an Old Testament Jogos. It is not only a 
halacha, to use a term of Talmudic Rabbinism, but it is an 
authoritative apocalypse of the Jewish Gnosis, 

§ John iii. 6. 

6 Sc. the Naassenes, according to H. 


164 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


from going forth out of Egypt, or from the intercourse 
below— 


H. —for Egypt is the body, according to them— 


J. —was turned back by Jesus! and made to flow 
upwards, 


H. Following after these and such like [follies], these most 
wonderful “ Gnostics,” discoverers of a new grammatical art, 
imagine that their prophet Homer showed forth these things 
arcanely ; and, introducing those who are not initiated into the 
Sacred Scriptures into such notions, they make a mock of them. 

And they say that he who says that all things are from One, 
is in error, [but] he who says they are from Three is right, and 
will furnish proof of the first principles [of things]. 


J. For one (H. he says) is the Blessed Nature of 
the Blessed Man Above, Adamas; and one is the 
[Nature] Below, which is subject to Death ; and one is 
the Race without a king*® which is born Above— 
where (H. he says) is Mariam the sought-for, and 
Jothdr the great sage, and Sepphoéra the seeing, and 
Moses whose begetting is not in Egypt—for sons 
were born to him in Madiam.* 

S. And this (H. he says) also did not escape the 
notice of the poets: 


1 T am persuaded that this stood originally in J., and not in C. 
—being LXX. for Joshua. 

2 This paragraph summarises S. See next 8. 

8 &Botrevros—that is, presumably, those who have learned to 
rule themselves, the “ self-taught” race, ete., of Philo. 

4 Eusebius (Prep. Evang., IX. xxviii. and xxix. 5 ff. ; ed. Dind. 
i. 505 ff, and 508 ff.), quoting from Alexander Cornelius (Poly- 
histor), who flourished about 100 B.c., has preserved to us a 
number of verses from a tragedy (called The Leading Forth) 
on the subject of Moses and the Exodus story, by a certain 
Ezechiel, a (? Alexandrian) Hebrew poet writing in Greek. In 
these fragments of Ezechiel’s tragedy, Mariam, Sepphora, and 
Jothér are all dramatis persone. These spellings and that of 
Madiam are, of course, all LXX. (that is, Greek Targum) forms 
of our A.V. Miriam, Jethro, Zipporah, and Midian. 


EDs oe 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 165 


“ All things were threefold divided, and each received 
his share of honour.” + 


C. For the Greatnesses (H. he says) needs must be spoken, but 
so spoken by all everywhere “that hearing they may not hear, 
and seeing they may not see.” 2 


J. For unless (H. he says) the Greatnesses* were 
spoken, the cosmos would not be able to hold together. 
These are the Three More-than-mighty Words (Logot): 
Kaulakau, Saulasau, Zeésar;—Kaulakau, the [Logos] 
Above, Adamas; Saulasau, the [Logos] Below ; Zeésar, 
the Jordan flowing upwards.‘ 

(17°) S. He (H. he says) is the male-female Man 


1 Il., xv. 189. 

2 Of. Luke viii. 10, Luke seems to preserve the reading of 
the source more correctly than Matt. xiii. 13 or Mark iv. 12. 
The Saying looks back to Is. vi. 9. 

3 Of. § 30 J. 

* These three names are based on the Hebrew text of Is, xxviii. 
13, A.V.: “But the Word of the Lord was unto them precept 
upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon 
line ; here a little, there a little.” LXX.: “nal ora adrois rd 
Adyiov Tod Oeod, OAtfis ert OAlpw, CAmls em’ eAmlds, Err puxpdy Ere 
aixpov.” That is: “And the logion [oracle, the Urim-and- 
Thummim, or instrument of the Logos, according to Philo] of God 
shall be to them tribulation on tribulation, hope on hope, still 
little still little.” See Epiphanius, Her., xxv. 4. “Saulasau 
saulasau” =“ tribulation on tribulation, tribulation on tribula- 
tion ;” “kaulakau kaulakau” =“hope on hope, hope on hope ;” 
“ zeésar [zeésar]” =“ still little still little ”—that is, the “ Height of 
Hope,” the “Depth of Tribulation,” and the “ As yet Very Little” — 
evidently referring to the as yet small number of the Regenerate. 
Of. Pistis Sophia, 354: “One out of a thousand, and two out of 
ten thousand.” See Salmon’s article, “Caulacau,” in Smith and 
Wace’s D. of Ch. Biog., i. 424 f. It is also to be noticed that 
Epiphanius ascribes the origin of these names to the Nicolaitans. 
In Hebrew the corresponding name would be Balaamites ; and 
Balaam or Bileam (Nico-laus) was one of the Rabbinical by-names 
for Jeschu (Jesus). See D. J. L., p. 188. 

5 This and the following paragraph seem to have been mis- 


166 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


in all, whom the ignorant call three-bodied Géryonés— 
Earth-flow-er, as though flowing from the earth;! while 
the Greek [theologi] generally call Him the “ Heavenly 
Horn of Mén,”? because He has mixed and mingled ® 
all things with all. 


C. For “all things (H. he says) were made through Him, and 
without Him no one thing was made that was made. In Him 
is Life.” 4 

This (H. he says) is “ Life,” the ineffable Race of perfect men, 
which was unknown to former generations. 

And the “nothing” ® which hath been made “without Him,” 
is the special cosmos ;® for the latter hath been made without 
Him by the third and fourth [? Ruler].” 


placed by J. or C., for § 19 connects directly with the exposition 
concerning the ithyphallic Hermes. See R. 100, n. 4. 

1 ds éx yiis péovra I'n-pudy-ny. 

2 Mén was the Phrygian Deus Lunus.’ See Drexler’s admirable 
art. s.v. in Roscher, ii. 2687-2770. 

5 kexépaxe—a word-play on xépas (horn), unreproducible in 
English. 

4 John i. 3,4. So the present text; but it must have been 
“ nothing” in the text which lay before C. 

5 Of. the logos, from The Book of the Great Logos according to the 
Mystery: “Jesus, the Living One, answered and said: Blessed 
is the man who knoweth this [Word (Logos)], and hath brought 
down the Heaven, and borne the Earth and raised it heavenwards, 
and he becometh the Middle, for it (the Middle) is ‘nothing.’”— 
Schmidt (C.), Gnostische Schriften im koptischer Sprache aus dem 


Codex Brucitanus (Leipzig, 1892), p. 144; and Koptisch-gnostische 


Schriften (Leipzig, 1905), p. 259. 

6 That is the world of phenomena, or cosmos of species (i5:xés) 
and not of genera or wholes, 

7 The fourth Demiurgic Power of the Sensible World was 
Esaldaios, as we have already seen from J., § 12. The indications 
are too vague to recover the “measures” and “numbers” of the 
system. But the “third and fourth ” are apparently both “fiery ”— 
the former giving “light,” the latter “heat.” Compare § 23 C., 
who speaks of the third Gate, or entrance to the third Heaven. 
This Heaven, the third from below, would correspond with the 
first etheric sphere—there being, presumably,:three before the 
fourth or middle, the “ Fiery Ruler.” 


yan 


Pee 
2a 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 167 


J. This! (H. he says) is the drinking-vessel—the 
Cup in which “ the King drinketh and divineth.” 2 

This (H. he says) was found hidden in the “ fair 
seed ” of Benjamin. 


(18) S. The Greeks also speak of it (H. he says) 
with inspired tongue, as follows: 


“Bring water, bring [me] wine, boy! 
Give me to drink, and sink me in slumber !3 
My Cup tells me of what race I must be born, 
[Speaking with silence unspeaking].” ¢ 


C. This (H. he says) would be sufficient alone if men would 
understand—the Cup of Anacreon speaking forth speechlessly the 
Ineffable Mystery. 


J. For (H. he says) Anacreon’s Cup is speech- 
less—in as much as it tells him (says Anacreon) with 
speechless sound of what Race he must be born— 


C. —that is, spiritual, not carnal— 
J. —if he hear the Hidden Mystery in Silence. 


C. And this is the Water at those Fair Nuptials which Jesus 
turned and made Wine. 

“This (H. he says) is the great and true beginning of the 
signs which Jesus wrought in Cana of Galilee, and made manifest 
His Kingship [or Kingdom] of the Heavens.” 

This (H. he says) is the Kingship [or Kingdom] of the 
Heavens within us,° stored up as a Treasure,’ as “ Leaven hid 
in three measures of Flour.” ® 


1 Sc. “ Heavenly Horn of Mén.” 

2 Of. Gen. xliv. 5. 

3 Bergk includes these verses among the Anacreontica, n. 63, 
p. 835. Of. Anacr., i. 10 (Bergk, 50, 10). 

4 The last line is reconstructed by Cruice (not. im loc.). Of. 
Anacr., xxvi. 25, 26. Was Omar Khayyam, then, “ Anacreon 
palingenés,” or was the same spirit in each ? 

5 Of. John ii. 11. The reading of our quotation, however, is 
very different from that of the familiar Textus Receptus. 

8 Of. Luke xvii, 21. 7 Of. Matt. xiii. 44. 

8 Of. Matt. xiii. 33 = Luke xiii. 20. 


168 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


(191) S. This is (H. he says) the Great Ineffable 
Mystery of the Samothracians,— 


C. —which it is lawful for the perfect alone to know—{that 
is] (H. he says) for us. 


J. For the Samothracians, in the Mysteries which 
are solemnised among them, explicitly hand on the 
tradition that this Adam is the Man Original. 

S. Moreover,” in the initiation temple of the Samo- 
thracians stand two statues of naked men, with both 
hands raised to heaven and ithyphallic, like the statue 
of Hermes in Cyllene.? 

J. The statues aforesaid are images of the Man 
Original.* 


C. And [also] of the regenerated spiritual [man], in all things 
of like substance with that Man. 

This (H, he says) is what was spoken by the Saviour : 

“Tf ye do not drink My Blood and eat My Flesh, ye shall not 
enter into the Kingdom of the Heavens.® 

“But even if ye drink (H. he says) the Cup which I drink,’ 
where I go, there ye cannot come.” ® 


i This seems to connect immediately with the end of § 16. See 
R. 100, n. 4. 

2S. probably had “For,” which was glossed by J. into 
“ Moreover.” 

3 But this “statue,” as we have seen, was the ithyphallus 
simply. 

4 Or Typal Man. 

5 Or, generated or born from Above. 

6 Cf. John vi. 53, which reads in T. R.: “Amén, Amén, I 
say unto you, if ye eat not the Flesh of the Son of Man and drink 
His Blood, ye have not Life in yourselves.” 

7 Of. Matt. xx, 22=Mark x. 38 (where the phrase is put in a 
question). 

8 Of. John viii. 21 and xiii, 33. It is remarkable that in the 
text of our Gospels these logoi are addressed to the Jews; C., 
however, takes them as sayings addressed to the disciples. It 
is possible that we may have here a “source” of the Fourth 
Gospel ! 


1 ER 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 169 


For He knew (H. he says) of which nature each of His 
disciples is, and that it needs must be that each of them should go 
to his own nature. 

For from the twelve tribes (H. he says) He chose twelve 
disciples, and through them He spake to every tribe.! 

On this account (H. he says) all have not heard the preach- 
ings of the twelve disciples; and even if they hear, they cannot 
receive them, For the [preachings] which are not according to 
their nature are contrary to it. 


S. This [Man] (H. he says) the Thracians who 
dwell round Haimos call Korybas,? and the Phrygians 
in like manner with the Thracians; for taking the 
source of His descent from the Head Above *— 

J. —and from the expressive Brain +— 

S. —and passing through all the sources of all things 
beneath—how and in what manner He descends we do 

' 
not understand. 

J. This is (H. he says) what was spoken : 

“His Voice we heard, but His Form we have not 
seen.” ® 

For (H. he says) the Voice of Him, when He hath 
been delegated and expressed, is heard, but the Form 
that descended from Above, from the Inexpressible 
[Man]—what it is, no one knows. It is in the earthy 
plasm, but no one has knowledge of it. 

This [Man] (H. he says) is He who “ inhabiteth the 


! These “ tribes,” then, were not the Jewish tribes, ten of which 
did not return, but twelve typical natures of men, and something 
else. 

2 See Immisch’s excellent art., “ Kureten u. Korybanten,” in 
Roscher, ii. 1587-1628. 

3 KoptBas, the Lord of the Corybantes, or frenzied priests of 
Cybele, is thus feigned by mystical word-play to be 6 &xd-xopudijs- 
Bas, “he who descends from the head.” 

4 Of. C., § 14. 

5 Apparently a quotation from some Jewish apocryphon. (Cf. 
John v. 37: “Ye have never at any time heard His voice nor 
have ye seen His form,” 


170 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Flood,”! according to the Psalter, who cries and calls 
from “many waters.” 2 

The “many waters” (H. he says) are the manifold 
genesis of men subject to death, from which He shouts 
and calls to the Inexpressible Man, saying: 

“Save my [? Thy] alone-begotten from the lions.” ® 

To this [Man] (H. he says) it hath been spoken: 

“Thou art my Son, O Israel, fear not; should’st 
thou pass through rivers, they shall not engulph thee ; 
should’st thou pass through fire, it shall not consume 
thee.” 5 

By “rivers” (H. he says) he® means the Moist 
Essence of Genesis, and by “fire” the impulse and 
desire towards Genesis. 

And: “Thou art mine; fear not.” 7 

And again he § says: 

“Tf a mother forget her children so as not to take 
pity on them or give them suck, [then] I too will 
forget you” ®°—saith Adamas (H. he says) to his own 
men. 

“Nay, even if a woman shall forget them, I will not 
forget you. Upon my hands have I graven you.” 

And concerning His Ascent— 

C. —that is his regeneration in order that he may be born 
spiritual, not fleshly. 

J. —the Scripture saith (H. he says): 

“Lift up the gates, ye who are rulers of you, and be 

1 Of. Ps, xxviii. 10. 2 Tbid., 3. 

8 Conflation of LXX. of Ps, xxiv. 17 and Ps. xxi. 21. 

4 A paraphrase of LXX.—Is. xli. 8. 

5 A paraphrase of LX X.—Is. xliii. 1. 

6 Tsaiah ; or the Word speaking through the prophet. 
. 7 Ts, xliii. 1. 

8 Sc. Isaiah. 


9 Paraphrase of LXX.—Is. xlix. 15. 
10 Ts, xlix. 16. 


Se ee 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 171 


ye lift up ye everlasting gates, and the King of Glory 
shall come in.” } 

This is a wonder of wonders. 

“For who (H. he says) is this King of Glory ?? 
A worm and no man, the scorn of men, and the con- 
tempt of the people* He is the King of Glory, the 
Mighty in War.”® 

By “ War” he ® means the “[war] in the body,” for 
the plasm is compounded of warring elements, as it is 
written (H. he says): 

“Remember the war that is [warred] in the body.” ? 

This (H. he says) is the Entrance, and this is the 
Gate, which Jacob saw, when he journeyed into Meso- 
potamia.® 


C. Which is the passing from childhood to puberty and man- 
hood ; that is, it was made known to him who journeyed into 
Mesopotamia. 


J. And Meso-potamia (H. he says) is the Stream 
of Great Ocean flowing from the middle of the Perfect 
Man. . 

And he® marvelled at the Heavenly Gate, saying: 

“How terrible [is] this place! This is naught else 


than the House of God; yea, this [is] the Gate of 
Heaven.” 1° 


C. On this account (H. he says) Jesus saith : 
“Tam the True Door.” ~ 


J. And he}? who says these things is (H. he 


1 Ps, xxiii. '7 and 9. 2 Ps, xxiii. 10. 

3 Sc. a “Serpent.” 4 Ps, xxi. 6. 

5 Ps, xxiii. 10 and 8. 

8 Sc. the psalmist ; or, rather, the Logos through the psalmist. 
7 Job xl. 27. 8 Gen. xxviii. 7. 

® Sc. Jacob. 10 Gen. xxviii. 17. 

1 Of. John x. 9—“true” not appearing in the traditional text. 
12 Sc. “ Jacob”—using the name in the Philonean sense. 


172 THRICE-GREATEST HERMKS 


says) the [one] from the Inexpressible Man, expressed 
from Above— 


C. —as the perfect man. The not-perfect man, therefore, 
cannot be saved unless he be regenerated passing through this 
Gate. 


(21) S. This same [Man] (H. he says) the Phrygians 
call also Papa;! for He calmed? all things which, . 
prior to His own manifestation, were in disorderly 
and inharmonious movement. 

For the name Papa (H. he says) is [the] Sound- 
of-all-things-together in Heaven, and on Earth, and 
beneath the Earth, saying: “Calm, calm”? the discord 
of the cosmos. 


C. And: Make “peace for them that are far”—that is, the 
material and earthy—‘ and peace for them that are near” 4— 
that is, the spiritual and knowing and perfect men. 


(22) S. The Phrygians call Him also Dead—when 
buried in the body as though in a tomb or sepulchre. 


C. This (H. he says) is what is said : 

“Ye are whited sepulchres, filled (H. he says) within with 
bones of the dead,® for Man, the Living [One]® is not in you.” 

And again He says : 

“ The dead shall leap forth from their graves ” 7— 
—that is, from their earthy bodies, regenerated spiritual, not 
fleshly. 

This (H. he says) is the Resurrection which takes place 


1 This is the Zeus Phrygius of Diodor. iii. 58, and Eustathius, 
565, 3. Of. R. 163, n. 3, and Zwei relig. Fragen, 104, n. 3. 

2 fravee. 

3 waive wade, a mystical word-play on wd-ra. 

£ Of. Eph. ii. 17. 

5 Of. what underlies Matt. xxiii. 27, Luke xi. 44, and Acts 
xxiii, 3. 

6 Of. “Jesus, the Living [One]” in the Introduction to the 
newest found Sayings; and also passim in the Introduction 
(apparently an excerpt from another document) to the First 
Book of Ieouw, in the Codex Brucianus. 

7 Of. what underlies Matt. xxvii. 52, 53. 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 173 


through the Gate of the Heavens, through which all those who 
do not pass (H. he says) remain Dead. 


S. The same Phrygians again call this very same 
[Man], after the transformation, God [or a God]. 


C. For he becomes (H. he says) God when, rising from the 
Dead, through such a Gate, he shall pass into Heaven. 

This is the Gate (H. he says) which Paul, the Apostle, knew, 
setting it ajar in a mystery, and saying that he was caught up by 
an angel and came to the second, nay the third heaven, into 
Paradise itself, and saw what he saw, and heard ineffable words, 
which it is not lawful for man to utter.? 

These (H. he says) are the Mysteries, ineffable [yet] spoken 
of by all,— 


“which [also we speak, yet] not in words taught of human 
wisdom, but in [words] taught of Spirit, comparing things 
spiritual with spiritual things. But the psychic man receiveth 
not the things of God’s Spirit, for they are foolishness unto him.” ? 


And these (H. he says) are the Ineffable Mysteries of the 
Spirit which we alone know. 

Concerning these (H. he says) the Saviour said : 

“No one is able to come to Me, unless my Heavenly Father 
draw him.” ¢ 

For it is exceedingly difficult (H. he says) to receive and 
accept this Great Ineffable Mystery. 

And again (H. he says) the Saviour said : 

“Not every one that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord! shall enter 
into the Kingdom of the Heavens, but he who doeth the Will of 
My Father who is in the Heavens ”5— 


—which [Will] they must do, and not hear only, to enter into 
the Kingdom of the Heavens. 


1 Some words have apparently been omitted, corresponding to 
the final clause of the last sentence in S. See R., p. 101. 

2 Of. 2 Cor. xii, 2-4, 

3 Of. 1 Cor. ii. 13, 14. 

4 Of. John vi. 44. Instead of “ Heavenly Father,” T. R. reads 
“the Father who sent me.” Compare with this the longest of the 
newest found logoi, concerning “them who draw us” towards 
self-knowledge or the “kingship within.” (Grenfell and Hunt, 
op. cit., p. 15.) 5 Of. Matt. vii, 21. 


174 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


And again He said (H. he says) : 

“The tax-gatherers and harlots go before you into the Kingdom 
of the Heavens.” ! 

For by “tax-gatherers” (reAdva:) are meant (H. he says) 
those who receive the consummations? (réAy) of the universal 
[principles]; and we (H. he says) are the “tax-gatherers” 
[“‘ upon whom the consummations of the zeons have come” ‘]. 

For the “jconsummations” (H. he says) are the Seeds dis- 
seminated into the cosmos from the Inexpressible [Man], by 
means of which the whole cosmos is consummated ; for by means 
of these also it began to be. 

And this (H. he says) is what is said : 

“The Sower went forth to sow. And some [Seeds] fell by the 
way-side, and were trodden under foot; and others on stony 
places, and they sprang up (H. he says), but because they had 
no depth, they withered and died. 

“ Others (H. he says) fell on the fair and good ground, and brought 
forth fruit—one a hundred, another sixty, and another thirty. 

“ He who hath (H. he says) ears to hear, let him hear !”® 

That is (H. he says), no one has been a hearer of these 
Mysteries, save only the gnostic, perfect [man]. 

This (H. he says) is the “fair and good ground” of which 
Moses saith : 

“J will bring you into a fair and good land, into a land flowing 
with milk and honey.” ® 

This (H. he says) is the “honey and milk” by tasting 
which the perfect [men] become free from all rule,’ and share in 
the Fullness. 

This (H. he says) is the Fullness whereby all things that are 
generated both are and are full-filled from the Ingenerable [Man]. 


1 Of. Matt. xxi. 31. T. R. reads “ The Kingdom of God.” 

2 Or perfectionings, or completions, or endings, or initiations ; 
also taxes—here a mystical synonym for pleromata (fullnesses) or 
logot (words). 

3 Or, collectors of dues. 

‘1 Oe.a 14. 

5 Of. the logos underlying Matt. xiii. 3 ff. = Mark iv. 3 ff.= Luke 
viii. 5 ff. 

8 Slightly paraphrased from LXX.—Deut, xxxi, 20. 

7 In that they are rulers of themselves, members of the “self- 
taught” Race—aBaorredtrovs, that is, free from the Rulers of 
Destiny, or Karmic bonds, 


eS te ec. pe 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 175 


(23) S. This same [Man] is called by the Phrygians 
Unftruitful. 


GC. For He is unfruitful as long as He is fleshly and works 
the work of the flesh. 

This (H. he says) is what is said: “Every tree that beareth 
not good fruit, is cut down and cast into the fire.” ! 

For these “fruits” (H. he says) are the logic? living men 
only who pass through the third Gate.* 


J. At anyrate they * say: 

“Tf ye have eaten dead things and made living 
ones, what will ye make if ye eat living things?” 

And by “living things” they mean Jogot and minds 
and men—the “pearls” of that Inexpressible [Man] 
cast into the plasm below.® 


C. This is what He saith (H. he says): 


“Cast not the holy thing to the dogs nor the pearls to the 
swine.” ? 

H. For they say that the work of swine is the intercourse of man 
with woman. 


(24) S, This same [Man] (H. he says) the Phrygians 
also call Ai-polos;® not because (H. he says) He feeds 


1 Of. Matt. iii. 10=Luke iii. 9. Of. also Hipp., Philos., vi. 16, 
in his maltreatment of the “Simonian” Gnosis. 

2 That is, Sons of the Logos. 

3 Cf. note on the third Ruler in § 17 C. 

4 Presumably the Phrygians. 

5 If our attribution of this to J. is correct (R. gives it to C.), we 
have perhaps before us a logos from the Phrygian Mysteries. 

6 This may possibly be assigned to C. ; but C. usually comments 
on J. and does not lead, and the terminology is that of J. and not 
of C. 

7 A simple form of Matt. vii. 6. Is it by any means possible 
an underlying mystical word-play on the Eleusinian logos “‘ é 
xte”; hence és (pig)—a synonym of xoipos—and xtwy (dog) ? 

8 This section seems to be misplaced, and § 25 probably 
followed § 23 immediately in the original ; the antithesis of Fruit- 
ful and Unfruitful following one another, as above (§ 22), the 
antithesis of Dead and God. 

® ai-wéaros, vulg. =“ goat-herd,” 


176 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


she-goats and he-goats, as the (C.—psychics! ) interpret 
the name, but because (H. he says) He is Aei-polos— 
that is, “ Always-turning” (Aei-polén),? revolving and 
driving round the whole cosmos in [its] revolution ; 
for polein is to “turn” and change things. 

Hence (H. he says) all call the two centres® of 
heaven poles. And the poet also (H. he says) when 
he says: “Hither there comes and there goes (pdleitaz) 
Old Man of the Sea, whose words are e’er true—Egypt’s 
undying Proteus.” 4 


1 §. had probably “ ignorant.” 

2 gemdros, Tovrécti del moray. Of. Plato, Cratylus, 408 ©, v. 

8 This is not very clear. But see Mozley’s article, ‘ Polus,” in 
Smith, Wayte, and Marindin’s D. of Gk. and Rom. Antiquities 
(London, 1891), ii. 442, 443: “Both in [Plato’s] Timeus, 40 B. 
and [Aristotle’s] De Colo, ii. 14, xéaos is used, not for the entire 
heaven, but for the axis of heaven and earth, around which the 
whole revolved. Again in the De Celo, ii. 2, the wéau are the 
poles, north and south, in our sense of the word.” Compare also 
the rubric in one of the rituals in the Greek Magic Papyri—C. 
Wessely, Griechische Zauberpapyrus, in Denkschr. d. Akad., ph. hist, 
Kl, xxxvi. (Vienna, 1888)—where it is said that the Sun will 
then move towards the Pole, and the theurgist will see Seven 
Virgins (the Seven Fortunes of Heaven) approach, and Seven 
Youths, with heads of bulls (the Pole-lords of Heaven), who make 
the axis turn (661-670). Compare this with the “cylinder” 
idea in the fragment of K. K. Then there will appear the Great 
God “in a white robe and trowsers, with a crown of gold on his 
head, holding in his right hand the golden shoulder of a heifer, 
that is the Bear that sets in motion and keeps the heaven turning 
in due seasons.” This God will pronounce an oracle, and the 
theurgist will then receive the gift of divination. The special 
interest of this tradition is that it contains a Magian element (to 
wit, the “trowsers”), and this connects closely with Phrygia 
and the cult that was wedded most closely with the Mithriaca, 
namely, that of the Mother of the-Gods. 

4 Od., iv. 384. In the Proteus myth Egypt is the Nile—that is, 
the “ Great Green,” the Heaven Ocean. Proteus was also said to 
have been the messenger or servant of Poseidon, the special God, 
it will be remembered, of Plato’s Atlantis. 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 177 


[By poleitaz] he does not mean “he is put on sale,” 
but “he turns about” [or comes and goes] there,—as 
though it were, [he spins] and goes round. 

And the cities in which we live, in that we turn 
about and circulate in them, are called poleis, 

Thus (H. he says) the Phrygians call Aipolos this 
[Man] who turns all things at all times all ways, and 
changes them into things kin. 


(25) The Phrygians, moreover (H. he says), call Him 
Fruitful. 


J. For (H. he says): 
“Many more are the children of the desolate 
[woman] than of her who hath her husband.”? 


C. That is, the regenerated, deathless, and ever-continuing 
[children] are many, although few are they [thus] generated ; 
but the fleshly (H. he says) all perish, though many are they 
[thus] generated. 


1 aimpdoxetat, aSynonym of rwAc?ra, which, besides the meaning 
of “coming and going,” or “moving about,” also signifies “is 
sold” ; but I do not see the appositeness of the remark, unless the 
“ignorant” so understood it. 

2 Is. liv. 1 ; quoted also in Gal. iv. 27. Of. Philo, De Ezecrat., 
§ 7; M. ii. 435, P. 936 (Ri. v. 254): “For when she [the Soul] 
is a multitude of passions and filled with vices, her children 
swarming over her—pleasures, appetites, folly, intemperance, 
unrighteousness, injustice—she is weak and sick, and lies at 
death’s door, dying ; but when she becomes sterile, and ceases to 
bring them forth, or even casts them from her, forthwith, from 
the change, she becometh a chaste virgin, and, receiving the 
Divine Seed, she fashions and engenders marvellous excellencies 
that Nature prizeth highly—prudence, courage, temperance, 
justice, holiness, piety, and the rest of the virtues and good 
dispositions.” 

There are, thus, seen to be identical ideas of a distinctly 
marked character in both J. and Philo. Did J., then, belong to 
Philo’s “circle”? Or, rather, did Philo represent a propagandist 
side of J.’s circle? In other words, can we possibly have before 
us in J. a Therapeut allegorical exercise, based on S., by an 
exceedingly liberal-minded Hellenistic Jewish mystic ? 

VOL. I. 12 


178 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


C. For this cause (H. he says) : 

“ Rachel bewailed her children, and would not (H. he says) be 
comforted weeping over them; for she knew (H. he says) -that 
they are not.”? 


J. And Jeremiah also laments the Jerusalem Below 
—not the city in Pheenicia,? but the generation below— 
which is subject to destruction, 

C. For Jeremiah also (H. he says) knew the perfect man, re- 
generated from water and spirit, not fleshly. 

J. At anyrate the same Jeremiah said : 

“He is man, and who shall know him?” 

C. Thus (H. he says) the knowledge of the perfect man is 
deep and hard to comprehend. 

J. For “The beginning of Perfection (H. he says) 
is Gnosis of man, but Gnosis of God is perfect 
Perfection.” * 

(26) 8S. And the Phrygians (H. he says) call Him 
also “ Plucked Gréen Wheat-ear”; and after the Phry- 
gians the Athenians [so designate Him], when, in the 
secret rites at Eleusis, they show those who receive in 
silence the final initiation there into the Great— 


C, —and marvellous and most perfect— 
S. —Epoptic Mystery, a plucked wheat-ear.® 


1 Cf. Matt. ii. 18, which depends on Jer. xxxi. 15 (LXX. 
xxxvili, 15). In T. R., however, the reading is by no means the 
same asin LXX, C, favours the Gospel text rather than that of 
LXX., 

2 This shows a very detached frame of mind on behalf of J. 
Perhaps it may be an interpolation of C, 

3 Jer, xvii. 9. 

4 This has all the appearance of a quotation from some mystic 
apocryphon of the Gnosis, 

5 See Cumont (F.), Mystéres de Mithra (Brussels, 1898). In 
the monuments representing the bull-slaying myth of the 
Mithriaca, the bull’s tail is frequently terminated in “wne truffe 
@épis” —the number varies, being either one, three, five, or seven. 
In the Bundahish all things are generated from the body, 


eee ee Oy 


ee eee ee Se ee ae 


SFE a ee, ee eer eee ee oe 


ps PP Ae 


Se ae a en 


Rp ae et EES METS 


7 
“5h 
" 
Bs 
ee 
a 
i. 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 179 


And this Wheat-ear is also with the Athenians the 
Light-giver '— 
CO. —perfect [and] mighty— 


J. —from the Inexpressible— 
S. —as the hierophant himself—not emasculated like 
the “ Attis,”? but made eunuch with hemlock juice— 


C. —and divorced from all fleshly generation— 


S. —in the night, at Eleusis, solemnising the Great 
Ineffable Mysteries, when the bright light streams 
forth,? shouts and cries aloud, saying: 


especially from the spinal marrow, of the slain bull. Sometimes 
the wheat-ears are represented as flowing like blood from the 
wound above the heart inflicted by the dagger of Mithras, the 
Bull-slayer (op. cit., i, 186, 187). The constellation of the Wheat- 
ear in the Virgin, which was supposed to give good harvests, 
presumably refers to the same idea (¢f. Eratosth., Cataster., 9). 
See op. cit., i. 202,205, n. 2, The wheat-ear, therefore, symbolised 
in one aspect the “ generative seed ”—in animals and men-animals 
the spermatozoa, in man a mystery. Mithraicism had the closest 
connection with the Phrygian Mystery Cult ; indeed, the Magna 
Mater Mysteries were used by it for the initiation of women, 
who were excluded from the Mithriaca proper. 

1 The Light-spark of Pistis Sophia nomenclature. 

2 That is, the hierophant initiate of the Great Mother. 

3 §rd worap mipi, lit., “to the accompaniment of much fire.” 
This refers, I believe, to the brilliant illumination of the Temple, 
or, as it was variously called, the Initiation Hall (reaeorfpior), 
the Mystic Enclosure (uvoriumds onxds)—though this was probably 
the inner court surrounding the Temple proper—the Great Hall 
(uéyapov), or Palace (&yd«ropov). As Hatch says, in the tenth of 
his famous Hibbert Lectures for 1888: “ And at night there were 
the mystic plays: the scenic representations, the drama in 
symbol and for sight. The torches were extinguished ; they 
stood outside the Temple [in the Mystic Enclosure, presumably] in 
the silence and darkness. The door opened—there was a blaze 
of light—before them was enacted the drama.”—Hatch (E.), The 
Influence of Greek Ideas and Usages upon the Christian Church 
(4th ed., London, 1892). See also my “ Notes on the Eleusinian 
Mysteries,” in The Theosoph. Rev. (April 1898), xxii. p. 151. 


180 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“(Our] Lady hath brought forth a Holy Son: Brim6 
[hath given birth] to Brimos ”— 


—that is, the Strong to the Strong. 


(27) J. And “{Our] Lady” (H. he says) is the 
Genesis— 


C. —the Spiritual, Heavenly [Genesis]— 


J. —Above. And the Strong is he who is thus 
generated. 

For it is the Mystery called “ Eleusis” and “ Anak- 
toreion ” ;—“ Eleusis,” because we— 


C. —the spiritual— 


J. —come* from Above, streaming down from 
Adamas, for eleus-esthai (H. he says) is “to come”; and 
“ Anaktoreion” [from anag-esthai, “leading back,” that 
is? ] from “ returning” * Above.® 

This [Return] (H. he says) is that of which 
those who are initiated into the great Mysteries of the 
Eleusinia speak. 

(28) S. And the law is that after they have been 
initiated into the Little Mystefies, they should be 
further initiated into the Great. 

“ For greater deaths do greater lots obtain.” ° 

The Little (H. he says) are the Mysteries of 


1 See especially Lobeck, Aglaophamus, 587 ff. 

2 #AOouer, this verb forming its tenses from »/ep and »/eavé, 
and 2Aevers meaning also “ coming.” 

8 Emend. by Keil. 

4 averdeiy, 

5 It need hardly be said that this is all mystical word-play ; 
dvaxrépeov is philologically derived from the same stem as &vaé, 
“a king.” Of. the Anaktoron or Palace as the name of the 
Eleusinian Temple of Initiation. 

6 Heracleitus, Fr.(25, Diels; 101, Fairbanks, First Philosophers 
of Greece). “Deaths” may also be rendered destinies, fates, or 
dooms. 


ae eo ae ee ee eS COO 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 181 


Persephoné Below; concerning which Mysteries and 
the way leading there and— 

C. —being broad and wide,— 

—taking [men] to Persephoné, the poet also speaks: 
“ Beneath this there is another path death-cold, 
Hollow and clayey. But this! is best to lead 
To grove delightsome of far-honoured Aphrodité,” * 

These ® are (H. he says) the Little Mysteries— 

C. —those of the fleshly generation— 

S. —and after men have been initiated into them, 
they should cease for a little, and become initiated in | 
the Great— 

C. —heavenly [Mysteries]. 

S. For they to whom the “deaths” in them‘ are 
appointed, “receive greater lots.” 

J. For this [Mystery] (H. he says) is the Gate of 
Heaven, and this is the House of God, where the Good 
God dwells alone; into which [House] (H. he says) 
no impure [man] shall come— 

C. —no psychic, no fleshly [man]— 

J. —but it is kept under watch for the spiritual 


. alone ;—where when they come, they must cast away 


their garments, and all become bridegrooms, obtaining 
their true manhood ® through the Virginal Spirit. 


1 Sc. the first path. 

2 These verses are from some unknown poet, who is con- 
jectured variously to have been either Parmenides or Pamphus of 
Athens. See notes in loc. in both Schneidewin and Cruice. 

3 Sc. those of Persephoné. 

4 Sc, the Greater Mysteries ; in which, presumably, the candidate 
went through some symbolic rite of death and resurrection. 

5 Or true virility, arnpoevwuévovs, which equates with 4ar- 
avdpoupévous, L believe, and does not mean demasculatt, or exuta 
virilitate, as translated respectively by Schneidewin and Cruice. 


182 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


For this (H. he says) is the Virgin big with child, 
conceiving and bearing a Son '— 


C. —not psychic, not fleshly, but a blessed Aton of AZons. ? 

Concerning these [Mysteries] (H. he says) the Saviour hath 
explicitly said that : 

“Narrow and strait is the Way that leadeth to Life, and 
few are they who enter it; but broad and wide [is] the Way 
that leadeth to Destruction, and many are they who journey 
thereby.”3 


8.4 Moreover, also, the Phrygians say that the Father 
of wholes® is Amygdalos ® — 

J. —no [ordinary] tree’ (H. he says); but that He 
is that Amygdalos the Pre-existing, who having in 
Himself the Perfect Fruit, as it were, throbbing® and 
moving in [His] Depth, He tore asunder? His Womb, 
and gave birth to His own Son °&— 


For the “death” mentioned above and the “ casting away of the 
garments,” see the Mystery Ritual in The Acts of John (F. F. F., 431- 
434); and for the latter and the “Virginal Spirit,” the passages 
on the Sacred Marriage which I have collected in the chapter on 
the main doctrines of Philo. 

1 A loose reference to LXX.—Is. vii. 14. 

2 Or Eternity of Eternities, 

3 Of. Matt. vii. 13,14; our text, however, is an inversion of 
the clauses, with several various readings, of T. R. 

4 This seems to connect with the Fruitful of § 25. See below, 
in the Hymn “ Whether blest Child,” the “cut wheat-ear” that 
Amygdalos brought forth. 

5 This refers to the First Man. 

6 Vulg., Almond-tree. 

7 In the Mithriaca, Mithras, in the most ancient myth, was 
represented as in (? born from) a Tree. See Cumont. 

8 Reading ofove) d:addCovra with §., C., and R.; but the Codex 
has ovov idig opifovra. If we read ¢év for the corrupt oor, we get 
“the Egg throbbing apart” or in separation—and so link on with 
the Orphic (Chaldean) tradition. 

® Siquvge, the synonym of a term which occurs frequently in 
the Pistis Sophia, “I tore myself asunder.” 

10 That is, to Man Son of Man. 


eee oe ee ee ee a ee Se ee eee See kee ee 


Oey eee ee a ee ee 


SO eI en See ae 


PO ee 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 183 


C. —the Invisible, Unnameable, and Ineffable [One] of whom 
we tell.} 


S. For “amyxat”? is, as it were, “to break” and 
“cut open”; just as (H. he says) in the case of in- 
flamed bodies and those which have some internal 
tumour, when physicians lance them, they speak of 
“ amychas.” ® 

Thus (H. he says) the Phrygians call him Amygdalos. 


C. From whom proceeded and was born the Invisible— 


“Through whom all things were made, and without whom 
nothing was made.” 4 


(30) S. The Phrygians also say that that which is 
generated from Him is Syriktés.® 
J. For that which is generated is Spirit in harmony.® 


C. For “God (H. he says) is Spirit.” 7 
Wherefore He says : 


“Neither in this mountain do the true worshippers worship, 
nor in Jerusalem, but in Spirit.” § 


? The somewhat boastful tone, shown in several passages already, 
probably betrays C. ; it may, however, be assigned to J. 

2 Gudiat, a play on Amygdalos, 

3 That is, ‘* scarifications.” 

* Of. John i, 3., reading, however, evdty and not the ovdt & of 
W. H. 

5 The Piper; properly, the player on thesyrinx or seven-reeded 
Pan-pipe. Compare the Mystery Ritual in The Acts of John: “1 
would pipe ; dance all of you!” (f/. F. F., p. 432); and, “We 
have piped unto you and ye have not danced” (Matt. xi. 17= 
Luke vii. 27). 

6 Or harmonised ; that is, cosmic or ordered. Of. CO. H., i. 15: 
“For being above the Harmony, He became a slave enharmo- 
nised” ; also Orph. Hymn., viii. 11 ; and also Acts of John, where 
the Logos is spoken of as “ Wisdom in harmony ” (F’. F. F., 436). 

7 Of. John iv, 24. 

- 8 A conflation of John iv. 21 and 23. The “ wpotaitain:” when 
used mystically, signifies the inner “ Mount of initiation.” Jeru- 
salem in the text signifies the Jerusalem Below. The true wor- 
shippers worship in the Jerusalem Above. 


184 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


For the worship of the perfect [men] (H. he says) is spiritual, 
not fleshly. 

J. And “Spirit” (H. he says) is there where both 
Father and Son are named, generated there from Him! 
and the Father. 


S. He? (H. he says) is the Many-named, Myriad- 
eyed, Incomprehensible, whom every nature desires, 
some one way, some another. 

J. This (H. he says) is the Word? of God, which is: 

“The Word of Announcement of the Great Power. 
Wherefore It shall be sealed, and hidden, and concealed, 
stored in the Habitation, where the Root of the Uni- 
versals has its foundation— 

“Of fons, Powers, Intelligences, Gods, Angels, 
Spirits Delegate, Existing Non-existences, Generated 
Ingenerables, Comprehensible Incomprehensibles, — 
Years, Months, Days, Hours, — of [the] Boundless 
Point, from which the most minute begins to increase 
by parts.‘ 

“For (H. he says) the Point which is nothing and 
is composed of nothing, though partless, will become by 


1 Se. the Son. 

2 Sc. the Piper. 

3 pijua—used also by Philo and LXX. 

‘ With slight verbal omissions the opening lines down to 
“foundation” are identical with the beginning of The Great Apoca- 
lypse or Announcement of the “ Simonian” tradition, an exceedingly 
interesting document from which some quotations have been 
preserved to us by Hippolytus elsewhere (Philos., vi. 9). The 
“Simonian” tradition was regarded by all the Church Fathers as 
the source of all “heresy” ; but modern criticism regards The 
Great Announcement as a late document of the Christian Gnosis. 
The quotation of this document by J., however, makes this opinion, 
in my view, entirely untenable. If my analysis stands firm, The 
Great Announcement is thus proved to be pre-Christian, according 
to the traditional date. I am also inclined to think that in this 
quotation itself we have already the work of a commentator and 
not the original form of the Apocalypse. 


——— 


ee 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 185 


means of its own Thought a Greatness! beyond owr-own 
comprehension.” 


C. This [Point] (H. he says) is the Kingdom of the Heavens, 
the “grain of mustard seed,” ? the partless point, the first existing 
for the body ; which no one (H. he says) knows save the spiritual 
[men] alone. 


J. This (H. he says) is what is said : 
“They are neither words nor languages whereby 
their * sounds are heard,” 4 


H. These things, [then,] which are said and done by all men, 
they thus interpret off-hand to their peculiar theory (vodv), pre- 
tending that they are all done with a spiritual meaning. 

For which cause also they® say that the performers in the 
theatres—they, too, neither say nor do anything without Design.® 


S. For example (H. he says), when the people 
assemble in the theatres, and a man comes on the stage, 
clad in a robe different from all others, with lute’ in 
hand on which he plays, and thus chants the Great 
Mysteries, not knowing what he says :® 

“ Whether blest Child of Kronos, or of Zeus, or of © 
Great. Rhea,—Hail, Attis, thou mournful song ® of Rhea ! 


1 Of.§ 16 J. 

2 Of. Matt. xiii, 31= Mark iv. 30= Luke xiii. 18. 

3 Sc. the Heavens of the Psalm, that is, the Alons mi the 
rest above. 

4 Ps, xviii. 3. 

5 The Naassenes, in H.’s view. 

6 ampovohrws. 

7 x:@dpav—the ancient cithara was triangular in shape and 
had seven strings. 

8 The text of the following Ode has been reconstructed by 
Wilamowitz in Hermes, xxxvii. 328; our translation is from his 
reconstruction. 

9 &ovena—a hearing, an instruction, lesson, discourse, sermon, 
applied to the public lectures of Pythagoras (Jamb., V. P., 174). 
It means also a song or even a “singer,” a “bard,” “Their 
singers (axovcyara) are thus called ‘bards’” (Posid. ap. Athen., vi. 
49). The Hearers (oi dxovryaricot) were the Probationers in the 


186 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Assyrians call thee thrice-longed-for Adonis ; all Egypt 
[calls thee] Osiris ; the Wisdom of Hellas [names thee] 
Mén’s Heavenly Horn ; the Samothracians [call thee] 
august Adama; the Hemonians, Korybas; the 
Phrygians [name thee] Papa sometimes, at times again 
Dead, or God, or Unfruitful, or Aipolos, or Green 
Reaped? Wheat-ear, or the Fruitful that Amygdalos 
brought forth, Man, Piper... Attis!” 


H. He [S.] says that this is the Attis of many forms of whom 
they [NN., in H.’s opinion] sing as follows : 


S. “Of Attis will I sing, of Rhea’s [Belovéd] ;—not 
with the boomings? of bells, nor with the deep-toned 4 
pipe of Idean Kurétes; but I will blend my song with 
Pheebus’ music of the lyre. Evoi! Evan!—for [thou 
art] Pan, [thou] Bacchus [art], and Shepherd of bright 
stars!” 


HIPpPoLytus’ CoNCLUSION 


H. For these and suchlike reasons these [Naassenes] frequent 
what are called the Mysteries of the Great Mother, believing that 
they obtain the clearest view of the Universal Mystery from the 
things done in them. 

For they have nothing beyond the [mysteries] therein enacted 
except that they are not emasculated. Their sole “ accomplish- 
ment,” [however,] is the business of the Eunuch, for they most 
severely and vigilantly enjoin to abstain, as though emasculated, 
from intercourse with women. And the rest of their business, as 
we have stated at length, they carry out just like the Eunuchs. 


School of Pythagoras (see s.vv. in Sophocles’ Lex.). Schneidewin 
and Cruice adopt Hermann’s “emendation,” &pioua (mutilation), 
_ but I prefer the reading of the Codex, as referring to the “ mournful 

piper,” or Logos, in the flowing “discord” of Rhea or Chaos, and 
therefore the “song” that Rhea is beginning to sing as she ¢ 8 
from Chaos to Cosmos, ‘ 

1 Perhaps Quick, for @cds is from 6é-ew, “to run,” to imitate the 
word-play of our mystics. 

2 Or cut. 3 BouBos, 4 Lit., ‘ bellower.” 


i 


ae ao 


= eeS Se SPS 


Sie we? ef 


ee ee ee ee 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 187 


And they honour nothing else but “ Naas,”! being called 
Naasseni. And Naas is the Serpent— 

J.2 —from whom (H. he says) are all those [things] 
called naous* under heaven, from naas, 

To that Naas alone every shrine and every rite of 
initiation and every mystery (H. he says) is dedicated ; 
and, in general, no initiation can be found under heaven 
in which a naos does not play a part, and [also] the 
Naas in it, from which it has got the name of naos. 

(H. Moreover, they say that) the Serpent is the 
Moist Essence— 


H, —just as [did] also Thales the Milesian *— 


J. —and (H. that) naught at all of existing things, 
immortal or mortal, animate or inanimate, can hold 
together without Him. 

[And they say] (H. that) all things are subject to 
Him, and (H. that) He is Good, and has all things in 
Him as in “ the horn of the one-horned bull” ;* so that 
He distributes beauty and bloom to all that exist 
according to each one’s nature and peculiarity, as 
though permeating all, just as [the River] “ proceeding 
forth out of Eden and dividing itself into four sources,” ® 

H. And they say that Eden is His Brain, as though it were 


bound and constricted in its surrounding vestures like heavens ; 
while Paradise they consider to be the Man as far as His Head only. 


This River, then, coming forth out of Eden (H. that 
is, from His Brain), is divided into four streams. 


1 The Hebrew Nahash, as we have already seen. ~ 

2 There being more of J. than of H. in this, I have printed it 
as J. though it is a defaced J. I am also persuaded that in what 
follows we have a quotation from a “Simonian” document by J. 
rather than J. himself, 

3 That is, temples. ‘ 

* Who derived all things symbolically from “ Water.” 

5 Of. Deut, xxxiii. 17. 6 Of. Gen. ii. 10 (LXX. ). 


188 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


And the name of the first river is called Pheisdn. 
“This is that which encircles all the land of Evilat, 
there where is the gold, and the gold of that land is 
fair ; there too is the ruby and the green stone.” ! 

This (H. he says) is His Eye—by its dignity and 
colours bearing witness to what is said. 

The name of the second river is Gedn. “This is that 
which encircles all the land of Aithiopia.” 2 

This (H. he says) is [His organ af] Hearing; for it 
is labyrinth-like. 

And the name of the third is Tigris, “This is that 
which flows the opposite way to the Assyrians.” $ 

This (H. he says) is [His organ of] Smell, for the 
current of it is very rapid; and it “flows the opposite 
way to the Assyrians,” because after the breath is 
breathed out, on breathing in again, the breath that 
is drawn in from without, from the air, comes in more 
rapidly, and with greater force. For this (H. he says) 
is the nature of respiration. 

“ And the fourth river [is] Euphratés.” ¢ 

This (H. they say) [is] the mouth, through which by 
the utterance of prayer and entrance of food, the (? C.— 
spiritual, perfect) man is rejoiced, and nourished and 
expressed.° 

This [River] (H. he says) is the Water above the 
Firmament.® 


C. Concerning which (H. he says) the Saviour hath said : 

“Tf thou hadst known Who it is Who asketh, thou wouldst have 
asked from Him [in return], and He would have given thee to 
drink of Living Water bubbling [forth].” 7 


1 Cf. Gen. ii. 11, 12. 2 Ibid., 13. 

3 Ibid., 14. 4 Ibid. 

5 The ‘subetanive of this is also to be found in the “Simonian” 
tradition “refuted” by Hippolytus. 

8 Of. Gen. i. 7. 7 Of. John iv. 10. 


a a 


ese Hae yes, ~~. 


a Ae ae es 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 189 


J. To this Water (H. he says) every nature comes, 
each selecting its own essence, and from this Water 
there comes to each nature what is proper [to it] (H. 
he says), more surely than iron to magnet,! and gold to 
the bone? of the sea-hawk, and chaff to amber. 


C. And if any man (H. he says) is “blind from birth,”? and 
hath not seen “the True Light, which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world,” *—let him: see again through us, and let 
him see as it were through— 


J.° —Paradise, planted with Trees and all kinds of 
seeds, the Water flowing amid all the Trees and Seeds, 
and [then] shall he see that from one and the same 
Water the Olive selects and draws Oil, and the Vine 
Wine, and each of the rest of the Trees according to 
its kind. 

1 Lit., the Heracleian stone. 

2 nepxid:. Of. Hipp., Phil., v. 17, on system of Sethiani (S. 198, 
36). Both S. and C. translate it correctly as “spina,” meaning 
“backbone”; it has, however, been erroneously translated as 
“spur.” Plutarch, De Is, e Os., xii. 3, tells us that the load-stone 
was called by the Egyptians “ bone of Horus” ; and Horus is the 
“hawk” par excellence, the “golden hawk.” Cf. Budge, Gods of 
the Egyptians, ii. 246, who says that we are informed by Manetho 
(thus making Manetho the main source of Plutarch) that the 
“load-stone is by the Egyptians called the ‘bone of Horus,’ as 
iron is the ‘bone of Typho.’” In the chapter of the Ritual 
dealing with the deification of the members, the backbone of the 
deceased is identified with the backbone of Set (xlii. 12), Else- 
where (cviii, 8) the deceased is said “to depart having the harpoon 
of iron in him.” This seems to suggest the black backbone of 
death and the golden backbone of life. 

3 Of. John ix. 1 ; rupads ex yeverijs, perhaps mystically meaning 
“blind from (owing to) genesis.” Of. the “blind accuser” in the 
Trismegistic treatise quoted by Zosimus in our Fragments, 

* John i. 9. 

5 This is evidently to be attributed to J., or rather his 
“ Simonian ” source, as it follows directly on the sentence about 
“every nature selecting.” Either C. has suppressed the opening 
words of J.’s paragraph and substituted his own gloss, or H. has 
mangled his text. 


190 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


But (H. he says) that Man is of no honour in the 
World, though of great honour [in Heaven, betrayed *] 
by those who know not to those who know Him not, 
being accounted “as a drop from a cask.” * 

But we (H. he says)— 


C. —are the spiritual [men] who— 
J. —choose for ourselves from— 
C. —the Living Water— 


J. —the Euphrates, that flows through the midst of 
Babylon, what is proper [to each of us]—journeying 
through the True Gate— 


C. —which is Jesus the Blessed. 
And of all men we alone are Christians,? accomplishing the 
Mystery at the third Gate— 


J. —and being anointed with the Ineffable Chrism 
from the Horn,‘ like David [was], not from the flask ® 
of clay, like Saul— 


C. —who was fellow-citizen with an evil. demon of fleshly 
desire. 

H. These things, then, we have set down as a few out of many. 
For innumerable are the attempts of their folly, silly and crazy. 
But since we have, to the best of our ability, exposed their 
unknowable Gnosis, it seems best to set down the following also. 

This is a Psalm which they have improvised ; by means of 
which they fancy they thus sing the baa of all the mysteries 
of their Error.® 


1 A lacuna in the Codex which is thus completed by S. and C. 

2 Of. Is, xl. 15. 

3 That is, Messiah-ites, or Anointed-ones, 

4 Cé.1 Sam. xvi. 13. 

5 1 Sam. x. 1. 

6 The text of this Hymn is in places very corrupt; I have 
followed Cruice’s emendations mostly. Schneidewin, for some 
reason or other which he does not state, omits it bodily from his 
Latin translation. 


See ae eee 


a; 


~~ 


pine Man SE Syn 


a a ee ene 


aoe - 


M9 Es poet 


Sy Sled > 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 191 


J. “First [was there] Mind the Generative? Law 
of All;# 

Second to the Firstborn was Liquid Chaos ; 
Third Soul through toil received the Law. 
Wherefore, with a deer’s* form surrounding her, 
She labours at her task beneath Death’s rule. 
Now, holding sway,° she sees the Light ; 
And now, cast into piteous plight, she weeps ; 
Now she weeps, and now rejoices ; 
Now she weeps, and now is judged; 
Now is judged, and now she dieth ; 
Now is born, with no way out for her ; in misery 
She enters in her wandering the labyrinth of ills. 
(?C.—And Jesus ® said): O Father, see! 
[Behold] the struggle still of ills on earth! 


1 This attribution may be thought by some to be questionable ; 
but as it is far more similar to the thought-sphere of J. than to 
that of C., I have so assigned it. It belonged to the same circles 
to which we must assign the sources of J. 

2 yevixds—perhaps “general” simply. 

3 Or, of the Whole. 

* The Codex has éaagoy, which, with Miller, we correct into 
éadgov. Is this a parallel with the “lost sheep” idea? Can it 
possibly connect with the conception underlying the phrases on 
the golden tablets found in tombs of “Orphic” initiates, on the 
territory of ancient Sybaris: “A kid thou hast fallen into the 
milk” (“Timpone grande” Tablet a, Naples Museum, Kaibel, 
C.1.G.L8., 642) ; and, “A kid I have fallen into milk” (“Cam- 
pagno” Tablet a, ibid., 641, and Append., p. 668)? But this 
connection is very hazy ; it more probably suggests the nebris or 
“fawn-skin” of the Bacchic initiates (see my Orpheus, “The 
Fawn-skin,” pp. 243 ff., for an explanation). Cruice proposes to 
substitute ddapby (“watery”); but there seems no reason why we 
should entirely reject the reading of the Codex, especially as C.’s 
suggestion breaks the rule of the “more difficult” reading being 
the preferable, 

5 BaotAelay—kingdom or kingship, 

6 The Codex reads elwey dinoots éodp. Can this possibly be a 
glossed and broken-down remains of "law Zenoap (lad Zeésar) ? 


192 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Far from Thy Breath! away she * wanders! 
She seeks to flee the bitter Chaos,® 

And knows not how she shall pass through. 
Wherefore, send me, O Father! 

Seals in my hands, I will descend ; 

Through AXons universal will I make a Path ; 
Through Mysteries all I'll open up a Way ! 
And Forms of Gods will I display ; 

The secrets of the Holy Path I will hand on, 
And call them Gnosis.” 5 


CONCLUSION OF ANALYSIS 


All this may have seemed, quite naturally, con- 
temptible foolishness to the theological prejudices of 
our worthy Church Father; but it is difficult for me, 
even in the twentieth century, not to recognise the 
beauty of this fine Mystic Hymn, and I hope it may be 
equally difficult for at least some of my readers, 

But to return to the consideration of our much over- 
written Source. 

This Source is plainly a commentary, or elaborate 
paraphrase, of the Recitation Ode, “ Whether, blest Child 
of Kronos,” which comes at the end (§ 30) and not, as 
we should expect, at the beginning, and has probably 
been displaced by Hippolytus. It is an exegetical 


1 Cruice thinks this refers to the breath of God’s anger ; but 
surely it refers to the Holy Spirit of God ? 

2 Sc. the soul, the “‘ wandering sheep.” 

3 Of. “the bitter Water,” or “Darkness,” or “Chaos,” of the 
Sethian system in Hipp., Philos., v.19; and see the note to the 
comments following Hermes-Prayer v., p. 92. 

4 The Logos in His descent through the spheres takes on the 
Forms of all the Powers. 


5 Is it, however, possible that the original Hymn had Naas 
(Nday) and not Gnosis ('véow) ? 


Se 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 193 


commentary written from the standpoint of the 
Anthrdpos-theory of the Mysteries (? originally Chal- 
dzean), the Man-doctrine. 

This commentary seems for the most part to run on 
so connectedly, that we can almost persuade ourselves 
that we have most of it before us, the lacune being 
practically insignificant. Paragraphs 6 and 7 §., how- 
ever, are plainly misplaced, and §§ 17 and 18 S. also 
as evidently break the connection,? 


THE HELLENIST COMMENTATOR 


The writer is transparently a man learned in the 
various Mystery-rites, and his information is of the 
greatest possible importance for a study of this ex- 
ceedingly obscure subject from an historical standpoint. 

With § 8 S., and the Egyptian Mystery-doctrine, we 
come to what is of peculiar interest for our present 
Trismegistic studies. Osiris is the Heavenly Man, the 
Logos; not only so, but in straitest connection with 
this tradition we have an exposition of the Hermes- 
doctrine, set forth by a system of allegorical interpreta- 
tions of the Bible of Hellas—the Poems of the 
Homeric cycle. Here we have the evident syncrasia 
Thoth =Osiris=Hermes, a Hermes of the “Greek 
Wisdom,” as the Recitation Ode phrases it, and a 
doctrine which H., basing himself on the commentator 
(§ 10), squarely asserts the Greeks got from Egypt. 

Nor is it without importance for us that in closest 
connection with Hermes there follow the apparently 
misplaced sections 17 and 18, dealing with the 
“Heavenly Horn,” or drinking-horn, of the Greek 
Wisdom, and the “Cup” of Anacreon; with which we 
may compare the Crater, Mixing-bowl or Cup, in which, 

1 Of. R. 99, 100; and 100, n. 4, 
VOL. 1 13 


194 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


according to Plato’s Timeus, the Creator mingled and 
mixed the elements and souls, and also the spiritual 
Cup of the Mind in our Trismegistic treatise, “The 
Crater or Monas,” C. H., iv. (v.). 

But above all things is it astonishing that we should 
find the commentator in S. quoting (§ 9) a logos from 
a document which, as we have shown in the note 
appended to the passage, is in every probability a 
Trismegistic treatise of the Poemandres type. 


THE JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN OVERWRITERS 


This commentary S. was worked over by a Jewish 
Hellenistic mystic J., whose general ideas and method 
of exegesis are exactly paralleled by those of Philo. 
In my opinion, he was a contemporary of that period 
and a member of one of those communities whom Philo 
classes generally as Therapeut. He was, moreover, 
not a worshipper of the serpent, but a worshipper of 
that Glorious Reality symbolised as the Serpent 
of Wisdom, and this connects him with initiation 
into Egypto-Chaldean or Chaldzo-Egyptian Mysteries. 
These he finds set forth allegorically in the prophetical 
scriptures of his race. His quotations from the LXX. 
show him to be, like Philo, an Alexandrian Hellenistic 
Jew; the LXX. was his Targum. 

J. again was overwritten by C., a Christian Gnostic, 
no enemy of either J. or S., but one who claimed that 
he and his were the true realisers of all that had gone 
before ; he is somewhat boastful, but yet recognises 
that the Christ-doctrine is not an innovation but a 
consummation. The phenomena presented by the New 
Testament quotations of C. are, in my opinion, of extra- 
ordinary interest, especially his quotations from or 
parallels with the Fourth Gospel. His quotations from 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 195 


or parallels with the Synoptics are almost of the same 
nature as those of Justin; he is rather dealing with 
“ Memoirs of the Apostles” than with verbatim quota- 
tions from our stereotyped Gospels. His parallels 
with the Fourth Gospel also seem to me to open up the 
question as to whether or no he is in touch with 
“ Sources ” of that “ Johannine ” document. 

On top of all our strata and deposits, we have—to 
continue the metaphor of excavation, and if it be not 
thought somewhat uncharitable—the refutatory rubbish 
of Hippolytus, which need no longer detain us here. 

I- would, therefore, suggest that C. is to be placed 
somewhere about the middle of the second century A.D.; 
J. is contemporary with Philo—say the first quarter of 
the first century A.D.; the Pagan commentator of S. is 
prior to Ji—say somewhere in the last half of the first 
century B.c.; while the Recitation Ode is still earlier, 
and can therefore be placed anywhere in the early 
Hellenistic period, the termini being thus 300-50 B.c.! 

And if the redactor or commentator in S. is to 
be placed somewhere in the last half of the first 
century B.c. (and this is, of course, taking only the 
minumum of liberty), then the Pcemandres type of 
our literature, which J. quotes as scripture, must, in its 
original Greek form, be placed back of that—say at 
least in the first half of the first century B.C,, as a 
moderate estimate.? If those dates are not proved, 


1 Wilamowitz’ hesitating attribution of it to the reign of 
Hadrian (117-138 a.D.) is, in my opinion, devoid of any objec- 
tive support whatever. (See R., p. 102.) Reitzenstein himself 
(p. 165) would place it in the second century B.c. 

2 Incidentally also it may be pointed out that this analysis 
gives the coup de grdce to Salmon’s contention (“ The Cross-refer- 
ences in the Philosophumena,” Hermathena, 1885, v. 389 ff.) 
that the great systems of the Gnosis made known to us only by 
Hippolytus are all the work of a single forger who imposed 


196 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


I am at anyrate fairly confident they cannot be 
disproved. 


ZOSIMUS AND THE ANTHROPOS- DOCTRINE 


That, moreover, the Anthropos-doctrine, to the spirit 
of which the whole commentary of our S. exegete is 
accommodated, was also fundamental with the ad- 
herents of the Trismegistic tradition, may be clearly 
seen from the interesting passage (which we give in the 
Fragments at the end of the third Volume) of Zosimus, 
a member of what Reitzenstein calls the Pomandres 
Community, who flourished somewhere at the end of 
the third and beginning of the fourth century a.p.! 

The sources of Zosimus for the Anthrdpos-doctrine, 
he tells us, are, in addition to the Books of Hermes, 
certain translations into Greek and Egyptian of books 
containing traditions (mystery-traditions, presumably) 
of the Chaldzans, Parthians, Medes, and Hebrews on 
the subject. This statement is of the very first im- 
portance for the history of Gnosticism as well as for 
appreciating certain elements in Trismegisticism. 
Though the indication of this literature is vague, it 
nevertheless mentions four factors as involved in the 
Hebrew tradition; the Gnostic Hebrews, as we should 


upon the credulity of the heresy-hunting Bishop of Portus. 
This contention, though to our mind one of the most striking 
instances of “the good Homer nodding,” was nevertheless practi- 
cally endorsed by Stahelin (Die gnostische Quellen Hippolyts in 
seiner Hauptschrift gegen die Haeretiken, 1890; in Teate u, Unter- 
suchungen, VI,), who went over the whole ground opened up 
by Salmon with minute and scrupulous industry. The general 
weakness of this extraordinary hypothesis of forgery has, how- 
ever, been well pointed out by De Faye in his Introduction a 
PEtude du Gnosticisme au II* et aw III* Siecle (Paris, 1903), 
pp. 24 ff.; though De Faye also maintains a late date, 
KR. p. 9. ' 


THE MYTH OF MAN IN THE MYSTERIES 197 


expect, were handing on elements from Chaldean, 
Parthian, and Median traditions. Translations of these 
books were to be found scattered throughout Egypt, 
and especially in the great library at Alexandria. 

There is, in my opinion, no necessity precisely, with 
Reitzenstein (p. 106, n. 6), to designate these books the 
“Ptolemaic Books,” and so to associate them with a 
notice found in the apocryphal “Eighth Book of 
Moses,” where, together with that of the Archangelic 
Book of Moses, there is mention of the Fifth Book of the 
“ Ptolemaic Books,” described as a book of multifarious 
wisdom under the title “One and All,” and containing 
the account of the “ Genesis of Fire and Darkness.” ! 

Another source of Zosimus was the Pinaz of Bitos 
or Bitys, of whom we shall treat in considering the 
information of Jamblichus. 

From all of these indications we are assured that 
there was already in the first centuries B.C. a well- 
developed Hellenistic doctrine of the descent of man 
from the Man Above, and of his return to that heavenly 
state by his mastery of the powers of the cosmos. 


PHILO oF ALEXANDRIA ON THE MAN-DocTRINE 


This date is further confirmed by the testimony of 
Philo (¢. 30 B.c.—45 A.D.). 

For, quoting the verse: “ We are all sons of One 
Man,”? he addresses those who are “companions of 
wisdom and knowledge” as those who are “Sons of 
one and the same Father—no mortal father, but an 
immortal Sire, the Man of God, who being the Reason 
(Logos) of the Eternal, is of necessity himself eternal.” * 

And again, a little further on: 


1 Dieterich, Abraxas, 203 ff. 2 Gen. xlii, 11. 
3 De Confus. Ling., § 11; M. i. 411, P. 326 (Ri. ii. 257). 


198 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“And if a man should not as yet have the good 
fortune to be worthy to be called Son of God, let him 
strive manfully to set himself in order' according to 
His First-born Reason (Logos), the Oldest Angel, who is 
as though it were the Angel-chief of many names; for 
he is called Dominion, and Name of God, and Reason, 
and Man-after-His-Likeness, and Seeing Israel. 

“ And for this reason I was induced a little before 
to praise the principles of those who say: ‘We are 
all sons of One Man.’ For even if we have not yet 
become fit to be judged Sons of God, we may at any 
rate be Sons of His Eternal Likeness, His Most Holy 
Reason (Logos); for Reason, the Eldest of all Angels, 
is God’s Likeness [or Image].” ? 


Thus Philo gives us additional proof, if more were 
needed, for the full Anthrdpos-doctrine was evidently 
fundamental in his circle—that is to say, in the 
thought-atmosphere of the Hellenistic theology, or the 
religio-philosophy, or theosophy, of his day, the be- 
ginning of the first century A.D. 

This date alone is sufficient for our purpose; but it 
is not too bold a statement even to say that the 
Man- Mystery was a fundamental concept of the 
brilliant period of the Hellenistic syncretism which 
succeeded to the founding of Alexandria—the period 
of the expansion of Hellas beyond her national borders; 
in other words, her birth into the greater world. 

It is enough to know that the Mystery was hidden 
and yet revealed in the shadow-garments of Chaldean, 
Babylonian, Magian, Phcenician, Hebrew, Egyptian, 
Phrygian, Thracian, and Greek mystery-traditions. It 
was, in brief, fundamental in all such wisdom-shows, 
and necessarily so, for it was the Christ-Mystery. 


1 To make himself a cosmos like the Great Cosmos. 
2 Thid., § 28; M. i. 426, 427, P. 341 (Ri. ii. 279). 


VII 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA AND THE 
HELLENISTIC THEOLOGY 


CONCERNING PHILO AND HIS MgETHop 


SEEING that a study of the Trismegistic literature is 
essentially a study in Hellenistic theology, no introduc- 
tion to this literature would be adequate which did not 
insist upon the utility of a careful review of the writings 
of Philo, the famous Jewish Hellenist of Alexandria, 
and which did not point to the innumerable parallels 
which are traceable between the basic principles of the 
Jewish philosopher-mystic and the main ideas embodied 
in our tractates. To do this, however, in detail would 
require a volume, and as we are restricted to the narrow 
confines of a chapter, nothing but a few general outlines 
can be sketched in, the major part of our space being 
reserved for a consideration of what Philo has to say 
of the Logos, or Divine Reason of things, the central 
idea of his cosmos. 

In perusing the voluminous writings! of our witness, 
the chief point on which we would insist at the very 
outset, is that we are not studying a novel system 
devised by a single mind, we are not even face to face 
with a new departure in method, but that the writings 
1 In all, upwards of sixty Philonean tractates are preserved to 
us ; and in addition we have also numerous fragments from lost 


works. 
199 


200 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


of our Alexandrian! came at the end of a line of 
predecessors; true that Philo is now, owing to the 
preservation of his writings, by far the most dis- 
tinguished of such writers, but he follows in their steps. 
His method of allegorical interpretation is no new 
invention,’ least of all is his theology. 

In brief, Philo is first and foremost an “ apologist” ; 
his writings are a defence of the Jewish myths and 
prophetic utterances, interpreted allegorically, in terms 
not of Hellenic philosophy proper, but rather of Hellen- 
istic theology, that is, of philosophy theologised, or of 
theology philosophised; in other words, in the language 
of the current cultured Alexandrian religio-philosophy 
of his day. 

As Edersheim, in his admirable article,’ says, speaking 


1 Philo is known to the Jews as Yedidyah ha-Alakhsanderi. 

2 Thus, in D. V. C.,§ 3; M. ii. 475, P. 893 (Ri. v. 309, C. 65), 
referring to his beloved Therapeuts, he himself says: “ They 
have also works of ancient authors who were once heads of their 
school, and left behind them many monuments of the method 
used in allegorical works.” Nor was this “allegorising” Jewish 
only ; it was common. It was applied to Homer; it was the 
method of the Stoics. Indeed, this “treatment (@epamela) of 
myths” was the only way in which the results of the philosophy 
and science of the time could be brought into touch with 
popular faith. 

The text I use is that of Richter (M. C. E.), Philonts Juda 
Opera Omnia, in Bibliotheca Sacra Patrum Ecclesiw Grecorum 
(Leipzig, 1828-1830), 8 vols. M. refers to the edition of Mangey ; 
P. to the Paris edition; Ri. stands for that of Richter—thus 
abbreviated so as not to be confused with R., which elsewhere 
stands for Reitzenstein ; C. stands for Conybeare’s critical text of 
the D. V. C. (Oxford, 1895), the only really critical text of any 
tractate which we so far possess, 

8 “Philo,” in Smith and Wace’s Dict. of Christ. Biog. (London, 
1887), iv. 357-389—by far the best general study on the subject 
in English. Drummond’s (J.) two volumes, Philo Judeus, or The 
Alexandrian Philosophy (London, 1888), may also‘be consulted, but 
they leave much to be desired. The only English translation 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 201 


of this blend of the faith of the synagogue with the 
thinking of Greece: “It can scarcely be said that in 
the issue the substance and spirit were derived from 
Judaism, the form from Greece. Rather does it often 
seem as if the substance had been Greek and only 
the form Hebrew.” 

But here Edersheim seems to be not sufficiently 
alive to the fact that the “Greek thinking” was already 
in Hellenistic circles strongly theologised and firmly 
wedded to the ideas of apocalypsis and revelation. 
How, indeed, could it have been otherwise in Egypt, 
in the face of the testimony of our present work ? 

Philo, then, does but follow the custom among the 
cultured of his day when he treats the stories of the 
patriarchs as myths, and the literally intractable 
narratives as the substance of an ethical mythology. 
It was the method of the religio-philosophy of the time, 
which found in allegorical interpretation the “antidote 
of impiety,” and by its means unveiled the supposed 
under-meaning (d7rovoia) of the myths. 

The importance of Philo, then, lies not so much in 
his originality, as in the fact that he hands on much 
that had been evolved before him; for, as Edersheim 
says, and as is clear to any careful student of the 
Philonean tractates: “His own writings do not give 
the impression of originality. Besides, he repeatedly 
refers to the allegorical interpretation of others, as 
well as to canons of allegorism apparently generally 
recognised. He also enumerates differing allegorical 
interpretations of the same subjects. All this affords 
evidence of the existence of a school of Hellenist 
[ Hellenistic, rather] interpretation ” (p. 362). 


is that of Yonge (C. D.), The Works of Philo Judeus (London, 
1854) in Bohn’s Library ; but it is by no means satisfactory, and 
I have in every instance of quotation made my own version. 


202 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


But this does not hold good only for the interpreta- 
tion of “the myths of Israel” by Hellenistic Jews; it 
holds good of the whole cultured religious world of the 
time, and pre-eminently of the Hellenistic schools of 
every kind in Egypt. In brief, Philo’s philosophy was 
often already philosophised myth before he ingeniously 
brought it into play for the interpretation of Hebrew 
story. 

In short, the tractates of Philo and our Trismegistic 
sermons have both a common background—Hellenistic 
theology or theosophy. Both use a common language. 

Philo, of course, like the rest of his contemporaries, 
had no idea of criticism in the modern sense; he was 
a thorough-going apologist of the Old Covenant 
documents. These were for him in their entirety the 
inerrant oracles of God Himself; nay, he even went to 
the extent of believing the apologetic Greek version to 
be literally inspired.! 

Nevertheless he was, as a thinker, confronted with 
the same kind of difficulties as face us to-day with im- 
measurably greater distinctness. The ideas of God, of 
the world-order, and of the nature of man, were so far 
advanced in his day beyond the frequently crude and 
repugnant representations found in the ancient scrip- 
tures of his people, that he found it impossible to claim 
for them on their surface-value the transcendency of 
the last word of wisdom from God to man, at anyrate 
among the cultured to whom he addressed himself. 
These difficulties he accordingly sought to remove by 
an allegorical interpretation, whereby he read into them 
the views of the highest philosophical and religious 
environment of his time. 

Having no idea of the philosophy of history, or of 
the history of religion, or of the canons of literary 


1 Or “divinely prompted” (De Vit. Mos., ii. 5-7). 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 203 


criticism, as we now understand these things, he never 
stopped to enquire whether the writers of the ancient 
documents intended their narratives to be taken as 
myths embodying an esoteric meaning ; much less did 
he ask himself, as we ask ourselves to-day, whether 
these writers had not in all probability frequently 
written up the myths of other nations into a history 
of their own patriarchs and other worthies; on the 
contrary, he relieved them of all responsibility, and 
entirely eliminated the natural human element, by his 
theory of prophecy, which assumed that they had acted 
as impersonal, passive instruments of the Divine 
inspiration. 

But even Philo, when he came to work it out, could 
not maintain this absolutism of inspiration, and so we 
find him elsewhere unable to ascribe a consistent level 
of inspiration to his “ Moses,” who of course, in Philo’s 
belief, wrote the Pentateuch from the first to the last 
word. Thus we find him even in the “Five Fifths” 
making a threefold classification of inspiration: (i.) The 
Sacred Oracles “spoken directly of God by His in- 
terpreter the prophet”; (ii.) Those prophetically de- 
livered “in the form of question and answer”; and 
(iii.) Those “proceeding from Moses himself while in 
some state of inspiration and under the influence of the 
deity.” + 

But what is most pleasant is to find that Philo 
admitted the great philosophers of Greece into his holy 
assembly, and though he gives the pre-eminence to 
Moses, yet it is, as it were, to a first among equals—a 
wide-minded tolerance that was speedily forgotten in 
the bitter theological strife that subsequently broke 
forth. 

1 De Vit. Mos., iii. 23, 24. 


204 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


THE GREAT IMPORTANCE OF HIS WRITINGS 


But what makes the writings of our Alexandrian so 
immensely important for us is, that the final decade 
of his life is contemporary with the coming into 
manifestation of Christianity in the Graeco-Roman 
world owing to the energetic propaganda of Paul. 

Philo was born somewhere between 30 and 20 B.c., 
and died about 45 A.D. There is, of course, not a single 
word in his voluminous writings that can in any way 
be construed into a reference to Christianity as tradi- 
tionally understood; but the language of Philo, if not 
precisely the diction of the writers of the New Testa- 
ment documents, has innumerable points of resemblance 
with their terminology ; for the language of Hellenistic 
theology is largely, so to speak, the common tongue of 
both, while the similarity of many of their ideas is 
astonishing. 

Philo, moreover, was by no megns an obscure member 
of the community to which he belonged ; on the contrary, 
he was a most distinguished ornament of the enormous 
Jewish colony of Alexandria, which occupied no less 
than two out of the five wards of the city.1_ His brother, 
Alexander, was the head of the largest banking firm of 
the capital of Egypt, which was also the intellectual 
and commercial centre of the Greco-Roman world. 
Indeed, Alexander may be said to have been the Roth- 
schild of the time. The operations of the firm embraced 
the contracting of loans for the Imperial House, while 
the banker himself was a personal friend of the Emperor, 
and his sons intermarried with the family of the Jewish 
King Agrippa. 

Philo, himself, though he would have preferred the 
solitude of the contemplative life, took an active part 


1 For a sketch of ancient Alexandria, see F. F. F., pp. 96-120. 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 205 


in the social life of the great capital; and, at the time 
of the greatest distress of his compatriots in the city, 
when they were overwhelmed by a violent outbreak of 
anti-semitism, their lives in danger, their houses 
plundered, and their ancient privileges confiscated, it 
was the aged Philo who was chosen as spokesman of 
the embassy to Caius Caligula (a.p. 40), 

Here, then, we have a man in just the position to 
know what was going on in the world of philosophy, of 
letters, and religion, and not only at Alexandria, but 
also wherever Jewish enterprise—which had then, as 
it now has, the main commerce of the world in its 
hands—pushed itself. The news of the world came to 
Alexandria, and the mercantile marine was largely 
owned by Hebrews. 

Philo is, therefore, the very witness we should choose 
of all others to question as to his views on the ideas we 
find in our Trismegistic tractates, and this we may now 
proceed to do without any further preliminaries. 


CONCERNING THE MYSTERIES 


Speaking of those who follow the contemplative 
life, Philo writes : 

“Now this natural class of men [lit. race] is to be 
found in many parts of the inhabited world; for both 
the Grecian and non-Grecian world must needs share 
in the perfect Good.” 2 

In Egypt, he tells us, there were crowds of them in 
every province, and they were very numerous indeed 
about Alexandria. Concerning such men Philo tells 
us elsewhere : 


1 For a translation of the famous tractate on this subject, from 
the recent critical text of Conybeare, see Ff. F. F., pp. 66-82. 
2 D. V. C.,§3; M. ii. 474, P, 891 (Ri. v. 308, C. 56). 


206 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“ All those, whether among Greeks or non-Greeks, 
who are practisers of wisdom (daoxyrat codias), living a 
blameless and irreproachable life, determined on doing 
injury to none, and on not retaliating if injury be 
done them,” avoid the strife of ordinary life, “in their 
enthusiasm for a life of peace free from contention.” 

Thus are they “most excellent contemplators of 
nature (Oewpol rijs gicews) and all things therein; 
they scrutinise earth and sea, and air and heaven, and 
the natures therein, their minds responding to the 
orderly motion of moon and sun, and the choir of all 
the other stars, both variable and fixed. They have 
their bodies, indeed, planted on earth below; but for 
their souls, they have made them wings, so that they 
speed through xther (aiOepoBarowvres), and gaze on 
every side upon the powers above, as though they 
were the true world-citizens, most excellent, who dwell 
in cosmos as their city ; such citizens as Wisdom hath 
as her associates, inscribed upon the roll of Virtue, 
who hath in charge the supervising of the common 
weal. ... 

“Such men, though [in comparison] but few in 
number, keep alive the covered spark of Wisdom 
secretly, throughout the cities [of the world], in order 
that Virtue may not be absolutely quenched and 
vanish from our human kind.”? 

Again, elsewhere, speaking of those who are good 
and wise, he says: 

“ The whole of this company (@/acos) have voluntarily 
deprived themselves of the possession of aught in 
abundance, thinking little of things dear to the flesh. 
Now athletes are men whose bodies are well cared for 
and full of vigour, men who make strong the fort, their 
body, against their soul; whereas the [athletes] of 

1 De Sept., §§ 3, 4; M. ii. 279, P. 1175 (Ri. v. 21, 22). 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 207 


[this] discipline, pale, wasted, and, as it were, reduced to 
skeletons, sacrifice even the muscles of their bodies to 
the powers of their own souls, dissolving, if the truth 
be told, into one form-—that of the soul,and by their 
mind becoming free from body. 

“The earthly element is, therefore, naturally dis- 
solved and washed away, when the whole mind in its 
entirety resolves to make itself well-pleasing unto 
God. This race is rare, however, and found with 
difficulty ; still it is not impossible it should exist.” + 

And in another passage, when referring to the small 
number of the “prudent and righteous and gracious,” 
Philo says: 

“But the ‘few,’ though rare [to meet with], are yet 
not non-existent. Both Greece and Barbary [that is, 
non-Greek lands] bear witness [to them]. 

“For in the former there flourished those who are 
pre-eminently and truly called the Seven Sages—though 
others, both before and after them, in every probability 
reached the [same] height—whose memory, in spite 
of their antiquity, has not evanished through the length 
of time, while that of those of far more recent date 
has been obliterated by the tide of the neglect of their 
contemporaries. 

“While in non-Grecian lands, in which the most 
revered and ancient in such words and deeds [have 
flourished], are very crowded companies of men of 
worth and virtue; among the Persians, for example, 
the [caste] of Magi, who by their careful scrutiny of 
nature’s works for purpose of the gnosis of the truth, 
in quiet silence, and by means of [mystic] images of 
piercing clarity (rpavwrépas eudpacerw) are made 
initiate into the mysteries of godlike virtues, and in 
their turn initiate [those who come after them]; in 


1 De Mut. Nom., § 4; M. i. 583, P. 1049 (Ri. iii. 168, 164). 


208 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


India the [caste] of the Gymnosophists, who, in addition 
to their study of the lore of nature, toil in [the fields 
of] morals, and [so] make their whole life a practical 
example of [their] virtue. 

“Nor are Palestine and Syria, in which no small 
portion of the populous nation of the Jews dwell, 
unfruitful in worth and virtue. Certain of them are 
called Essenes, in number upwards of 4000, according 
to my estimate,” ?} 

Philo then proceeds to give an account of these 
famous mystics. 

In Egypt itself, however, he selects out of the many 
communities of the Therapeute and Therapeutrides 
(which the Old Latin Version renders Cultores et 
Cultrices pietatis)? only one special group, with which 
he was presumably personally familiar and which was 
largely Jewish. Of this order (cvornua)* Philo gives 
us a most graphic account, both of their settlement 
and mode of life. By means of this intensely interest- 
ing sketch of the Contemplative or Theoretic Life, and 
by the parallel passages from the rest of Philo’s works 
which Conybeare has so industriously marshalled in his 
“Testimonia,” we are introduced into the environment 
and atmosphere of these Theoretics, and find ourselves 
in just such circumstances as would condition the 
genesis of our Trismegistic literature. | 

The whole of Philo’s expositions revolve round the 
idea that the truly philosophic life is an initiation into 
the Divine Mysteries; for him the whole tradition of 
Wisdom is necessarily a mystery-tradition. Thus he 
tells us of his own special Therapeut community, south 
of Alexandria: 

1 Quod Om. Prob. L., § 11; M. ii. 456, P. 876 (Ri. v. 284, 285). 


2, p. 146, 1. 13. 
3 -D, V.C.,§9; M. ii. 482, P. 900 (Ri. v. 319, C. 111). 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 209 


“ In every cottage there is a sacred chamber,! which 
is called semneton and monastérion,? in which, in soli- 
tude, they are initiated into the mysteries of the solemn 
life.” 8 

With this it will be of interest to compare Matt. 
vi. 6: “When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and 
when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is 
in the Hidden; and thy Father who seeth in the Hidden, 
shall reward thee.” 

It is said that among the “ Pharisees” there was a 
praying-room in every house. 

We may also compare with the above reference to 
the Mysteries Luke xii. 2 = Matt. x. 26, from a 
“source ” which promised the revelation of all mysteries, 
following on the famous logos also quoted in Mark iv. 22 
and Luke viii. 17.: 

“For there is nothing veiled which shall not be 
revealed, and hidden which shall not be made known.” 
“Therefore, whatsoever ye (M., I) have spoken in dark- 
ness, shall be heard in the light, and what ye have 
spoken (M., heard) in the ear in the closets, shall be 
heralded forth on the house-tops.” 

Both Evangelists have evidently adapted their 
“source” to their own purposes, but the main sense of 
the original form is not difficult to recover. 

It is further of interest to compare with the first 
clause of the above passages the new-found Jogos: 

“ Jesus saith, Everything that is not before thy face 
and that which is hidden from thee, shall be revealed 
to thee. For there is nothing hidden that shall 

1 Or shrine—a small room or closet. 

2 That is, a sanctuary or monastery, the latter in the sense of a 
place where one can be alone or in solitude. This is the first use 
of the term “ monastery” known in classical antiquity, and, as we 
see, it bears a special and not a general meaning. 

3 Ibid., § 3; M. ii. 475, P. 892 (Ri. v. 309, C. 60). 

VOL. 1. 14 


210 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


not be made manifest, nor buried that shall not be 
raised,” + 

But there are other and more general mysteries 
referred to in Philo; for, in speaking of the command 
that the unholy man who is a speaker of evil against 
divine things, should be removed from the most holy 
places and punished, our initiated philosopher bursts 
forth: 

“Drive forth, drive forth, ye of the closed lips, and 
ye revealers? of the divine mysteries,® the promiscuous 
and rabble crowd of the defiled—souls unamenable to 
purification, and hard to wash clean, who wear ears 
that cannot be closed, and tongues that cannot be kept 
within the doors [of their lips]—organs that they ever 
keep ready for their own most grievous mischance, 
hearing all things and things not law [to hear].” 4 

Of these “ineffable mysteries,”® he elsewhere says, 
in explaining that the wives of the patriarchs stand 
allegorically as types of virtues : 

“But in order that we may describe the conception 
and birth-throes of the Virtues, let bigots® stop their 
ears, or else let them depart. For that we give a 
higher teaching of the mysteries divine, to myste who 
are worthy of the holiest rites [of all]. 

“And these are they who, free from arrogance, 
practise real and truly genuine piety, free from display 


1 Grenfell and Hunt, New Sayings of Jesus (London, 1904), 
p. 18. 

2 Lit., ye myste and hierophants. 

3 Lit., orgies—that is, “burstings forth” of inspiration, or 
revealings. 

4 De Prof., § 16; M. i. 558, P. 462 (Ri. iii, 128). 

5 Leg. Alleg., i. 39, 4. 

® Serctdaluoves —here meaning the literalists; it generally 
signifies the religious in a good sense, and the superstitious in a 
bad one. 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 211 


of any kind. But unto them who are afflicted with 
incorrigible ill—the vanity of words, close-sticking unto 
names, and empty show of manners, who measure purity 
and holiness by no other rule [than this]—{for them] 
we will not play the part of hierophant.” + 

Touching on the mystery of the Virgin-birth, to which 
we will refer later on, Philo continues : 

“These things receive into your souls, ye myst, ye 
whose ears are purified, as truly sacred mysteries, and 
see that ye speak not of them to any who may be 
without initiation, but storing them away within your 
hearts, guard well your treasure-house; not as a 
treasury in which gold and silver are laid up, things 
that do perish, but as the pick and prize of all posses- 
sions—the knowledge of the Cause [of all] and Virtue, 
and of the third, the child of both.” * 

Now the “ Divine Spirit” (Oeiov zvetua), says Philo, 
does not remain among the many, though it may dwell 
with them for a short time. 

“It is [ever] present with only one class of men— 
with those who, having stripped themselves of all the 
things in genesis, even to the innermost veil and 
garment of opinion, come unto God with minds 
unclothed and naked. . 

“And so Moses, having fixed his tent outside the 
camp—that is, the whole of the body *—that is to say, 
having made firm his mind, so that it does not move, 
begins to worship God; and, entering into the dark- 
ness, the unseen land, abideth there, being initiated into 
the most holy mysteries. And he becomes, not only 
a mystés, but also a hierophant of revelations,* and 


1 De Cherub., § 12; M.i. 146, P. 115 (Ri. i. 208). 

2 Tbid., § 14; M. i. 147, P. 116 (Ri. i, 210). 

3 Of. Leg. Alleg., ii. § 15; M.i. 76, P. 1097 (Ri. i. 105), 
* Lit., orgies, 


212 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


teacher of divine things, which he will indicate to those 
who have had their ears made pure. 

“With such kind of men, then, the Divine Spirit is 
ever present, guiding their every way aright.”? 

Referring to the ritual sacrifices of a heifer and two 
rams, Philo declares that the slaying of the second ram, 
and the symbolic rite of sprinkling certain portions of 
the bodies of the priests with its blood, was ordained 
“for the highest perfectioning of the consecrated by 
means of the purification of chastity 2—which [ram] he 
[‘ Moses’] called, according to its meaning, the ‘[ram] 
of perfectioning,’ since they [the priests] were about to 
act as hierophants of mysteries appropriate to the 
servants (Oepavevrais) and ministers of God.” ® 

So also Philo’s language about the Therapeuts proper, 
and not the allegorically interpreted temple-sacrificers, 
is that of the Mysteries, when he writes : 

“Now they who betake themselves to this service 
(Oeparretav) [of God do so], not because of any custom, 
or on some one’s advice and appeal, but carried away 
with heavenly love, like those initiated into the Bacchic 
or Corybantic Mysteries, they are a-fire with God until 
they see the object of their love.” ¢ 

These Mysteries were, of course, not to be revealed 
except to the worthy. Therefore he says: 

“Nor because thou hast a tongue and mouth and 
organ of speech, shouldst thou tell forth all, even things 
that may not be spoken.” § 

1 De Gigan., § 12; M. i. 270, P. 291 (Ri. ii. 61). 

2 Philo, apparently, would have it that the sacrifice of the ram, 
which was a symbol of virility, signified the obligation of chastity 
prior to initiation into the higher rites. 

3 De Vit. Mos., iii. § 17; M. ii. 157, P. 675 (Ri. iv. 216), The 
Therapeuts, with Philo, then do not mean “ Healers,” as has been 
sometimes thought, but “Servants of God.” 


‘ D.V.C, $2; M. ii. 478, P. 891 (Ri. v. 306, C. 41, 42). 
5 Quod Det. Pot. Insid., § 27 ; M. i. 211, P. 174 (Ri. i. 296).- 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 2138 


And in the last section of the same treatise he 
writes : 

“Wherefore I think that [all] those who are not 
utterly without [proper] instruction, would prefer to be 
made blind than to see things not proper [to be seen], 
to be made deaf than to hear harmful words, and to 
have their tongue cut out, to prevent them divulging 
aught of the ineffable Mysteries. ... Nay, it is even 
better to make oneself eunuch than to rush madly into 
unlawful unions.” ? 

With which we may usefully compare Matt. v. 29: 
“Tf thy right eye offend thee, cut it out and cast it 
from thee”; and Matt. xix. 12: “There are some who 
have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the 
kingdom of the heavens; he that can receive it, let 
him receive it.” Both passages are found in the first 
Gospel only. 

For the comprehension of virtue man requires the 
reason only; but for the doing of ill, the evil man re- 
quires the organs of the body, says our mystic dualist ; 
“for how will he be able to divulge the Mysteries, if he 
have no organ of speech ?’’? 

This continual harping on the divulging of the 
Mysteries, shows that Philo considered it the greatest 
of all enormities; we might almost think that he had 
in view some movement that was divulging part of the 
mystery-tradition to the untrained populace. 

Elsewhere, speaking of those “who draw nigh unto 
God, abandoning the life of death, and sharing in 
immortality,” he tells us these are the “ Naked”— 
(that is, “naked” of the trammels of the flesh)—who 
sacrifice all to God. And he adds that only these “are 
permitted to see the ineffable Mysteries of God, who 

1 Tbid., § 48; M. i, 224, P. 186 (Ri. i. 314). 
2 Leg. Alleg., i. § 32; M. i, 64, P. 59 (Ri. 1. 87). 


214 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


are able to cloak them and guard them” from the un- 
worthy.! 

With regard to these Mysteries, they were, as we 
might expect, divided into the Lesser and the Greater 
—in the former of which the neophytes “ worked on the 
untamed and savage passions, as though they were 
softening the [dough? of their] food with reason 
(logos).” 

The manner of preparing this divine food, so that it 
becomes the bread of life, was a mystery.* 

One of the doctrines revealed in these Lesser Mysteries 
was plainly that of the Trinity; for, commenting on 
Gen. xvii, 2: “And he lifted up his eyes and looked, 
and, lo, three men stood by him ”—Philo writes : 

“* He lifted up his eyes, not the eyes of his body, for 
God cannot be seen by the senses, but by the soul 
[alone]; for at a fitting time He is discovered by the ° 
eyes of wisdom. 

“ Now the power of sight of the souls of the many 
and unrighteous is ever shut in, since it lies dead in 
deep sleep, and can never respond and be made awake 
to the things of nature and the types and ideas within 
her. But the spiritual eyes of the wise man are awake, 
and behold them; nay, they are sleeplessly alert, ever 
watchful from desire of seeing. 

“ Wherefore it is well said in the plural, that he raised 
not one eye, but all the eyes that are in the soul, so 
that one would have said that he was altogether all eye. 
Having, then, become the eye, he begins to see the holy 
and divine vision of the Lord, in such a fashion that the 
one vision appeared as a trinity, and the trinity as a 
unity.” * | 

1 Leg. Alleg., ii. § xv.; M. i. 76, P. 1097 (Ri. i. 106). 

2 Which they brought out of Egypt—that is, the body. 
3 De Sacrif., § 16; M. i. 174, P. 139 (Ri. i. 245). 

4 Quest. in Gen., iv. § 2; P. Auch. 243 (Ri. vii. 61). 


SSE Se a ae 


ee OA ee a Se 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 215 


Elsewhere, referring to the same story, and to the 
words of Abraham to Sarah “ to hasten and knead three 
measures of fine meal, and to make cakes upon the 
hearth,”1 Philo expounds the mystery at length as 
follows. It refers to that experience of the inner life: 

“When God, accompanied by His two highest 
Potencies, Dominion (apx7) and Goodness, making One 
[with Himself] in the midst, produces in the seeing soul 
a triple presentation, of which [three persons] each 
transcends all measure; for God transcendeth all 
delineation, and equally transcendent are His Potencies, 
but He [Himself] doth measure all. 

“ Accordingly, His Goodness is the measure of things 
good, and His Dominion is the measure of things subject, 
while He Himself is chief of all, both corporeal and 
incorporeal.? 

“ Wherefore also these Potencies, receiving the Reason 
(Logos) of His rules and ordinances, measure out all 
things below them. And, therefore, it is right that 
these three measures should, as it were, be mingled and 
blended together in the soul, in order that, being per- 
suaded that He is Highest God, who transcendeth His 
Potencies, both making Himself manifest without them, 
and also causing Himself to be seen in them, it [the 
soul] may receive His impressions (yapaxripas), and 
powers, and blessings, and [so] becoming initiate into 
the perfect secrets, may not lightly disclose the divine 
Mysteries, but, treasuring them up, and keeping sure 
silence, guard them in secret. 

“For it is written: ‘Make [them] secret,—for the 
sacred sermon (Adyov) of initiation (uvoryv) about the 
Ingenerable and about His Potencies ought to be kept 


1 Gen. xviii. 6. 
2 That is, apparently, the “ good” =the “incorporeal,” and the 
“subject” =the “corporeal.” 


216 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


secret, since it is not within the power of every man to 
guard the sacred trust (zapaxaraOyxyv) of the divine 
revelations (dpyiwv).” ! 


CONCERNING THE SACRED MARRIAGE 


But the chief of all the mysteries for Philo was, 
apparently, the Sacred Marriage, the mystic union of 
the soul, as female, with God, as male (Deo nubere). In 
this connection he refers to Gen. iv. 1: 

“ And Adam knew his wife. And she conceived and 
bare Cain. And she said: J have gotten a man by 
means of the Lord. And He caused her also to bring 
forth Abel his brother.” ? 

We are, of course, not concerned with the legitimacy 
or consistency of Philo’s allegorising system, whereby 
he sought to invoke the authority of his national 
scriptures in support of his chosen doctrines; but we 
are deeply concerned with these doctrines themselves, 
as being the favourite dogmas of his circle and of 
similar circles of allied mystics of the time. 

His views on the subject are clearly indicated, for he 
tells us in the same passage that he is speaking of a 
secret of initiation, not of the conception and parturi- 
tion of women, but of Virtues—that is, of the virtuous 
soul. Accordingly he continues in § 13: 

“But it is not lawful for Virtues, in giving birth to 
their many perfections, to have part or lot in a mortal 
husband. And yet they will never bring forth of 
themselves, without conceiving their offspring of 
another. 

“Who, then, is He who soweth in them their glorious 
[progeny], if not the Father of all universal things— 

1 De Saocrif,, § 15; M. i. 173, 174; P. 139 (Ri: i. 244, 245), 
2 De Cherub., § 12; Mi. 146, P. 115 (Ri. i. 208), 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA yaw 


the God beyond all genesis, who yet is Sire of every- 
thing that is? For, for Himself, God doth create no 
single thing, in that He stands in need of naught; but 
for the man who prays to have them [He creates] 
all things.” 

And then, bringing forward Sarah, Leah, Rebecca, and 
Sepphora, as examples of the Virtues who lived with 
the great prophets of his race, Philo declares that 
“Sarah” conceived, when God looked upon her while 
she was in solitary contemplation, and so she brought 
forth for him who eagerly longed to attain to wisdom 
—namely, for him who is called “ Abraham.” 

And so also in the case of “ Leah,” it is said “God 
opened her womb,” which is the part played by a 
husband ; and so she brought forth for him who under- 
went the pains of labour for the sake of the Beautiful— 
namely, for him who is called “Jacob”; “so that 
Virtue received the divine seed from the Cause [of 
all], while she brought forth for that one of her lovers 
who was preferred above all other suitors.” 

So also when the “ all-wise,” he who is called “ Isaac,” 
went as a suppliant to God, his Virtue, “ Rebecca,” that 
is Steadfastness, became pregnant in consequence of his 
supplication. 

Whereas “ Moses,” without any supplication or prayer, 
attained to the winged and sublime Virtue “Sepphora,” 
and found her with child by no mortal husband.! 

Moreover, in § 14, in referring to Jeremiah, Philo 
writes : 

“For I, having been initiated into the Great 
Mysteries by Moses, the friend of God, nevertheless 
when I set eyes upon Jeremiah, the prophet, and learned 
that he is not only a mystes, but also an adept hiero- 
phant, I did not hesitate to go to him as his disciple. 

1 [bid., § 13; M. i. 147, P. 116, 117 (Ri. i. 209). 


218 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“ And he, in that in much [he says] he is inspired by 
God, uttered a certain oracle [as] from the Face of God, 
who said unto the Virtue of Perfect Peace: ‘ Hast thou 
not called Me as ’twere House and Father and Husband 
of thy virginity ?’ '—suggesting in the clearest [possible] 
fashion that God is both Home, the incorporeal land of 
incorporeal ideas, and Father of all things, in that He 
did create them, and Husband of Wisdom, sowing for 
the race of mankind the seed of blessedness into good 
virgin soil. } 

“For it is fitting God should converse with an 
undefiled, an untouched and pure nature, with her who 
is in very truth ¢he Virgin, in fashion very different 
from ours. 

“For the congress of men for the procreation of 
children makes virgins women. But when God begins 
to associate with the soul, He brings it to pass that she 
who was formerly woman becomes virgin again. For 
banishing the foreign and degenerate and non-virile 
desires, by which it was made womanish, He substitutes 
for them native and noble and pure virtues... . 

“But it is perhaps possible that even a virgin soul 
may be polluted by intemperate passions, and so 
dishonoured. 

“Wherefore the oracle hath been careful to say that 
God is husband not of ‘a virgin’—for a virgin is 
subject to change and death—but of ‘ virginity’ [that 
is of] the idea which is ever according to the same 
[principles], and in the same mode. 

“For whereas things that have qualities, have with 
their nature received both birth and dissolution, the 
[archetypal] potencies which mould them have obtained 
a lot transcending dissolution. 


1 Jer. iv. 3—where A.V. translates: “Wilt thou not from this 
time cry unto me, My father, thou art the guide of my youth ?” 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 219 


“ Wherefore is it not fitting that God, who is beyond 
all generation and all change, should sow [in us] the 
ideal seeds of the immortal virgin Virtues, and not those 
of the woman who changes the form of her virginity ?”! 

But, indeed, as Conybeare says: 

“The words, virgin, virginity, ever-virginal, occur on 
every other page of Philo. It is indeed Philo who first” 
formulated the idea of the Word or ideal ordering 
principle of the Cosmos being born of an ever-virgin 
soul, which conceives, because God the Father sows 
into her His intelligible rays and divine seed, so beget- 
ting His only well-beloved son, the Cosmos.” * 

Thus, speaking of the impure soul, Philo writes : 

“For when she is a multitude of passions and filled 
with vices, her children swarming over her—pleasures, 
appetites, folly, intemperance, unrighteousness, injustice 
—she is weak and sick, and lies at death’s door, dying ; 
but when she becomes sterile, and ceases to bring them 
forth or even casts them from her, forthwith, from 
the change, she becometh a chaste virgin, and, receiving 
the Divine Seed, she fashions and engenders marvel- 
lous excellencies that nature prizeth highly—prudence, 
courage, temperance, justice, holiness, piety, and the rest 
of the virtues and good dispositions.” * 

So also, speaking of the Therapeutrides, he writes : 

“Their longing is not for mortal children, but for a 
deathless progeny, which the soul that is in love with 
God can alone bring forth, when the Father hath sown 
into it the spiritual light-beams, by means of which it 

1 De Cherub., § 14, 15; M. i. 148, P. 116, 117 (Ri. i. 210, 211). 

2 In this, however, I venture to think that Conybeare is mis- 
taken ; it was a common dogma of the Hellenistic theology of the 
time. 

3 Op. sup. cit., pp. 302, 303. 

* De Execrat., § 7; M. ii. 435, P. 936 (Ri. v. 254). See “ Myth 
of Man in the Mysteries,” 8. § 25 J. 


220 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


shall be able to contemplate (Oewpeiv) the laws of 
wisdom.” ! 

And as to the progeny of such virgin-mothers, Philo 
elsewhere instances the birth of “Isaac ”—“ which 
could not refer to any man,” but is “a synonym of Joy, 
the best of the blessed states of the soul—Laughter, 
the spiritually conceived (évd:aeros)* Son of God, Who 
bestoweth him as a comfort and means of good cheer 
on souls of perfect peace.” ® 

And a little later on he adds: 

“And Wisdom, who, after the fashion of a mother, 
brings forth the self-taught Race, declares that God is 
the sower of it.” ¢ 

And yet, again, elsewhere, speaking of this spiritual 
progeny, Philo writes: 

“But all the Servants of God (Therapeuts), who are 
lawfully begotten, shall fulfill the law of [their] nature, 
which commands them to be parents. For the men 
shall be fathers of many sons, and the women mothers 
of numerous children.” ® 

So also, in the case of the birth of Joseph, when his 
mother, Rachael, says to Jacob: “Give me children !”— 
“the Supplanter, disclosing his proper nature, will 
reply: ‘Thou hast wandered into deep error. For I 
am not in God’s place, who alone is able to open the 
wombs of souls, and sow in them virtues, and make 
them pregnant and mothers of good things,’”® 

So too, again, in connection with the birth of Isaac, 
referring to the exultant cry of Sarah: “The Lord hath 

1D, V. C., § 8; M. ii. 482, P. 899 (Ri. v. 318, C. 108). 

? Elsewhere an epithet of the Logos. 

3 De Mut, Nom., § 23 ; M. i. 598, P, 1065 (Ri. iii, 183). 

4 Tbid., § 24; M.i. 599, P. 1065 (Ri. iii. 184). 

5 De Prem, e Pen., § 18; M. ii. 425, P. 927 (Ri. v. 241). 

6 Leg. Alleg,, iii. § 63 ; M. i, 122, 123, P. 94 (Ri. i. 175). Of, 
Gen. xxx. 2: “Am I in God’s stead ?” 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 221 


made me Laughter; for whosoever heareth, rejoiceth 
with me”!—Philo bursts forth: 

“Open, then, wide your ears, ye myste, and receive 
the most holy mysteries. ‘Laughter’ is Joy, and 
‘hath made’ is the same as ‘hath begotten’; so that 
what is said hath the following meaning: ‘The Lord 
hath begotten Isaac’ —for He is Father of the perfect 
nature, sowing in the soul and generating blessedness.” ? 

That all of this was a matter of vital moment for 
Philo himself, may be seen from what we must regard 
-as an intensely interesting autobiographical passage, in 
which our philosopher, speaking of the happy child- 
birth of Wisdom, writes: 

“For some she judges entirely worthy of living with 
her, while others seem as yet too young to support such 
admirable and wise house-sharing; these latter she 
hath permitted to solemnise the preliminary initiatory 
rites of marriage, holding out hopes of its [future] 
consummation. 

“*Sarah, then, the Virtue who is mistress of my soul, 
hath brought forth, but hath not brought forth for me 
—for that I could not, because I was too young, receive 
[into my soul] her offspring—wisdom, and righteousness, 
and piety—because of the brood of bastard brats which 
empty opinions had borne me. 

“For the feeding of these last, the constant care and 
incessant anxiety concerning them, have forced me to 
take no thought for the legitimate children who are 
the true citizens, 

“Tt is well, therefore, to pray Virtue not only to 
bear children, who even without praying brings her fair 


1 Gen. xxi. 6. A.V.: “God hath made me to laugh, so that 
all that hear will laugh with me.” 

2 Leg. Alleg., iii. § 77; M. i. 131, P. 101 (Ri. i. 187). Of. also 
De Cherub., § 13 ; M, i. 147, P. 115 (Ri. i. 209). 


232 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


progeny to birth, but also to bear sons for us, so that 
we may be blessed with a share in her seed and offspring. 

“For she is wont to bear to God alone, with thank- 
fulness repaying unto Him the first-fruits of the things 
she hath received, [to Him] who, Moses says, ‘hath 
opened’ her ever-virgin ‘ womb,’” } 

But, indeed, Philo is never wearied of reiterating this 
sublime doctrine, which for him was the consummation 
of the mysteries of the holy life. Thus, then, again he 
sets it forth as follows: 

“We should, accordingly, understand that the True 
Reason (Logos) of nature has the potency of both father 
and husband for different purposes—of a husband, 
when he casts the seed of virtues into the soul as into 
a good field; of a father, in that it is his nature to 
beget good counsels, and fair and virtuous deeds, and 
when he hath begotten them, he nourisheth them with 
those refreshing doctrines which discipline and wisdom 
furnish. 

“And the intelligence is likened at one time to a 
Virgin, at another to a wife, or a widow, or one who has 
not yet a husband. 

“[It is likened] to a virgin, when the intelligence 
keeps itself chaste and uncorrupted from pleasures and 
appetites, and griefs and fears, the passions which 
assault it; and then the father who begot it, assumes 
the leadership thereof. 

“And when she (intelligence) lives as a comely wife 
with comely Reason (Logos), that is with virtuous 
Reason, this self-same Reason himself undertakes the 
care of her, sowing, like a husband, the most excellent 
concepts in her. 

“But whenever the soul is bereft of her children of 


1 Gen. xxix. 31. Oong. Erud. Grat., § 2; M. i. 520, P. 425 
(Ri. iii. 72). 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 223 


prudence, and of her marriage with Right Reason, 
widowed of her most fair possessions, and left desolate . 
of Wisdom, through choosing a blameworthy life— 
then, let her suffer the pains she hath decreed against 
herself, with no wise Reason to play physician to her 
transgressions, either as husband and consort, or as 
father and begetter.”} 

Referring to Jacob’s dream of the white, and spotted, 
and ring-straked, and speckled kine, Philo tells us that 
this, too, must be taken as an allegory of souls. The 
first class of souls, he says, are “ white.” 

“The meaning is that when the soul receives the 
Divine Seed, the first-born births are spotlessly white, 
like unto light of utmost purity, to radiance of the 
greatest brilliance, as though it were the shadowless 
ray of the sun’s beams from a cloudless sky at noon.” * 

With this it is of service to compare the Vision of 
Hades seen by Thespesius (Aridzus), and related by 
Plutarch. Thespesius’ guide in the Unseen World 
draws his attention to the “colours” and “markings” 
of the souls as follows: 

“Observe the colours of the souls of every shade and 
sort: that greasy, brown-grey is the pigment of sordid- 
ness and selfishness; that blood-red, inflamed shade is 
a sign of a savage and venomous nature; wherever 
blue-grey is, from such a nature incontinence in 
pleasure is not easily eradicated; innate malignity, 
mingled with envy, causes that livid discoloration, in 
the same way as cuttle-fish eject their sepia. 

“Now it is in earth-life that the vice of the soul 
(being acted upon by the passions, and re-acting upon 
the body) produces these discolorations; while the 
purification and correction here have for their object 

1 De Spec. Leg., § 7; M. ii. 275, P. 774 (Ri. v. 15, 16). 
2 De Som., i. § 35; M, i. 651, P. 595 (Ri. iii. 257). 


224 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


the removal of these blemishes, so that the soul may 
become entirely ray-like and of uniform colour.” ? 

Again,in giving theallegorical meaning of the primitive- 
culture story of Tamar,” Philo not only interprets it by 
the canon of the Sacred Marriage, but also introduces 
other details from the Mysteries. Thus he writes: 

“For being a widow she was commanded to sit in 
the House of the Father, the Saviour; for whose sake 
for ever abandoning the congress and association with 
mortal [things], she is bereft and widowed from [all] 
human pleasures, and receives the Divine quickening, 
and, full-filled with the Seeds of virtue, conceives, and 
is in travail with fair deeds. And when she brings 
them forth, she carries off the trophies from her 
adversaries, and is inscribed as victor, receiving as a 
symbol the palm of victory.” * 

And every stage of this divine conception is but the 
shadow of the great mystery of cosmic creation, which 
Philo sums up as follows: 

“We shall, however, be quite correct in saying that 
the Demiurge who made all this universe, is also at the 

‘same time Father of what has been brought into 
existence; while its Mother is the Wisdom of Him 
who hath made it—with whom God united, though 
not as man [with woman], and implanted the power of 
genesis. And she, receiving the Seed of God, brought 
forth with perfect labour His only beloved Son, whom 
all may perceive *—this Cosmos,”® 


1 De Ser. Num. Vind., 565 c.; ed. Bern. iii. 459. See, for a 
translation of the whole Vision, my “Notes on the Eleusinian 
Mysteries,” Theosophical Review (April, May, June, 1898), xxii. 
145 ff., 232 ff, 312 ff. 

2 Gen. xxxviii. 11 ff. 

3 Quod Deus Immut., § 29 ; M. i. 293, P. 313 (Ri. ii. 94). 

* Lit., “sensible.” | 

6 De Ebriet., § 8; M. i. 361, P, 244 (Ri. i. 189). 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 225 


CONCERNING THE LoGos 


The idea of God found in Philo is that of the more 
enlightened theology of his time. God is That which 
transcends all things and all ideas. It would, of course, 
be a far too lengthy study to marshal the very numerous 
passages in which our philosopher sets forth his view 
on Deity; and so we shall select only two passages 
simply to give the reader who may not be acquainted 
with the works of the famous Alexandrian, some notion 
of the transcendency of his conception. For, as he 
writes : 

“What wonder is it if That-which-[really]-is trans- 
cends the comprehension of man, when even the 
mind which is in each of us, is beyond our power of 
knowing? Who hath ever beheld the essence of 
the soul?”?} 

This Mystery of Deity was, of necessity, in itself 
ineffable; but in conception, it was regarded under two 
aspects—the active and the passive causative principles. 

“The Active Principle, the Mind of the universals, is 
absolutely pure, and absolutely free from all admixture ; 
It transcendeth Virtue; It transcendeth Wisdom; nay, 
It transcendeth even the Good Itself and the Beautiful 
Itself. 

“The Passive Principle is of itself soulless and 
motionless, but when It is set in motion, and enformed 
and ensouled by the Mind, It is transformed into the 
most perfect of all works—namely, this Cosmos.” ? 

This Passive Principle is generally taken by com- 
mentators to denote Matter; but if so, it must be 
equated with Wisdom, which we have just seen was 
regarded by Philo as the Mother of the Cosmos. 

1 De Mut. Nom., § 2; M. i. 579, P. 1045 (Ri. iii. 159), 
2 De Mund. Op., § 2; M.i, 2, P. 2 (Ri. i. 6). 
VOL, I. 15 


226 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


But beyond all else Philo is useful to us in record- 
ing the views of contemporary Hellenistic theology 
concerning the concept of the Logos, the Mystery of 
the Heavenly Man, the Son of God. Even as this word 
of mystic meaning comes forward in almost every 
tractate and fragment of our Trismegistic literature, so 
in Philo is it the dominant idea in a host of passages. 

It should, however, never be forgotten that Philo is 
but handing on a doctrine; he is inventing nothing. 
His testimony, therefore, is of the greatest possible 
value for our present study, and deserves the closest 
attention. We shall accordingly devote the rest of 
this chapter exclusively to this subject, and marshal 
the evidence, if not in Philo’s own words, at anyrate 
in as exact a translation of them as we can give; for 
although much has been written on the matter, we 
know no work in which the simple expedient of letting 
Philo speak for himself has been attempted. 


THE Son oF Gop 


The Logos, then, is pre-eminently the Son of God, 
for Philo writes : 

“Moreover God, as Shepherd and King, leads [and 
rules] with law and justice the nature of the heaven, 
the periods of sun and moon, the changes and _har- 
monious progressions of the other stars—deputing [for 
the task] His own Right Reason (Logos), His First- 
born Son, to take charge of the sacred flock, as though 
he were the Great King’s viceroy.” } 

Of this Heavenly Man, who was evidently for Philo 
the Celestial Messiah of God, he elsewhere writes : 

“ Moreover, I have heard one of the companions of 
Moses uttering some such word (Jogos) as this: ‘ Behold 

1 De Agric, § 13; M. i. 308, P. 195 (Ri. ii. 116). 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 227 


Man whose name is East,’ +—a very strange appellation, 
if you imagine the man composed of body and soul to 
be meant; but if you take him for that Incorporeal 
Man in no way differing from the Divine Image, you 
will admit that the giving him the name of East exactly 
hits the mark. 

“For the Father of things that are hath made him 
rise as His Eldest Son, whom elsewhere He hath called 
His First-born, and who, when he hath been begotten, 
imitating the ways of his Sire, and contemplating His 
archetypal patterns, fashions the species [of things].” * 

Here we notice first of all Philo’s graphic manner 
(a commonplace of the time) of quoting Ezekiel as 
though he were still alive, and he had heard him speak ; 
’ and, in the second place, that the First-born Son is 
symbolically represented as the Sun rising in the East. 


Tue Trugz HicH PRiEst 


That, moreover, the Logos is the Son of God, he 
explains at length in another passage, when writing of 
the true High Priest: 

“But we say that the High Priest is not a man, but 
the Divine Reason (Logos), who has no part or lot in 
any transgressions, not only voluntary errors, but also 
involuntary ones. For, says Moses, he cannot be defiled 
either ‘on account of his father, the Mind, nor ‘on 
account of his mother,’* the [higher] Sense—in that, 
as I think, it is his good fortune to have incorruptible 

1 Or Rising. Cf. Zech. vi. 12—where A.V. translates: “Behold 
the man whose name is The Branch.” Philo, however, follows 
LXX., but reads &v@pwros instead of avfp. The Man-doctrine of 
the “ Poeemandres” and of the Naassene Document was a funda- 
mental one with Philo. 

2 De Confus. Ling., § 14; M. i, 414, P. 329 (Ri. ii. 262). 

3 Of. Lev. xxi. 11. 


228 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


and perfectly pure parents,—God for father, who is as 
well Father of all things, and for mother Wisdom, 
through whom all things came into genesis; and because 
‘his head hath been anointed with oil,—I mean his 
ruling principle! shineth with ray-like brilliance, so 
that he is deemed fit for robing in his vestures. 

“Now the Most Ancient Reason (Logos) of That- 
which-is is vestured with the Cosmos as his robe ;—for 
he wrappeth himself in Earth and Water, Air and Fire, 
and what comes from them; the partial soul [doth 
clothe itself] in body ; the wise man’s mind in virtues. 

“ And ‘he shall not take the mitre from off his head,’ 
[signifies] he shall not lay aside the royal diadem, 
the symbol of his admirable rule, which, however, is 
not that of an autocrat-emperor, but of a viceroy. 

“Nor ‘will he rend his garments,—for the Reason 
(Logos) of That-which-is, being the bond of all things, as 
hath been said, both holds together all the parts, and 
binds them, and does not suffer them to be dissolved or 
separated.” 2 

In another passage Philo treats of the same subject 
still more plainly from the point of view of the 
Mysteries, writing as follows: 

“For there are, as it seems, two temples of God: — 
the one is this Cosmos, in which there is also the High 
Priest, His First-born Divine Reason (Logos); the 
other is the rational soul, whose [High] Priest is the 
True Man, a sensible copy of whom is he who rightly 
performs the prayers and sacrifices of his Father, who 
is ordained to wear the robe, the duplicate of the 


1 +d fyeuovixndv—that is, the authoritative or responsible part of 
the soul, namely, the reason—a Stoic technical term. 

2 De Prof., § 20; M. i. 562, P. 466 (Ri. iii. 133). The quota- 
tions look back to Lev. xxi. 10, but the readings in the first two 
differ from the LXX. 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 229 


universal heaven, in order that the cosmos may work 
together with man, and man with the universe.” ? 


THE ELDER AND YOUNGER SONS oF GOD 


The Cosmic Logos is not the sensible cosmos, but the 
Mind thereof. This Philo explains at length. 

“It is then clear, that He who is the generator of 
things generated, and the artificer of things fashioned, 
and the governor of things governed, must needs be 
absolutely wise. He is in truth the father, and 
artificer, and governor of all in both the heaven and 
cosmos. 

“Now things to come are hidden in the shade of 
future time, sometimes at short, and sometimes at 
long distances. But God is the artificer of time as 
well. For He is father of its father; and time’s father 
is the cosmos, which manifests its motion as the 
genesis of time; so that time holds to God the place 
of grandson. 

“ For that this cosmos ? is the Younger Son of God, 
in that it is perceptible to sense. The Son who’s older 
than this one, He hath declared to be no one [perceiv- 
able by sense], for that he is conceivable by mind 
alone. But having judged him worthy of the elder’s 
rights, He hath determined that he should remain with 
Him alone. 

“This [cosmos], then, the Younger Son, the sensible, 
. being set a-moving, has caused time’s nature to appear 
and disappear ; so that there nothing is which future is 
with God, who has the very bounds of time subject to 
Him. For ’tis not time, but time’s archetype and 
paradigm, Eternity (or AZon), which is His life, But 


1 De Som., § 37; M. i. 653, P. 597 (Ri. iii, 260). 
2 That is the sensible and not the intelligible cosmos. 


230 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


in Eternity naught’s past, and naught is future, but all 
is present only.” ! 


Yet Gop 1s ONE 


The Logos, then, is not God absolute, but the Son of 
God par excellence, and as such is sometimes referred to 
as “second,” and once even as the “second God.” Thus 
Philo writes : 

“But the most universal [of all things] is God, and 
second the Reason (Logos) of God.” ? 

In his treatise entitled Questions and Answers, 
however, we read: 

“ But why does He say as though [He were speaking] 
about another God, ‘in the image of God I made 
“man”, but not in His own image ? 

“ Most excellently and wisely is the oracle propheti- 
cally delivered. For it was not possible that anything 
subject to death should be imaged after the supremest 
God who is the Father of the universes, but after the 
second God who is His Reason (Logos). 

“For it was necessary that the rational impress in the 
soul of man should be stamped [on it] by the Divine 
Reason (Zogos), since God, who is prior even to His own 
Reason, transcendeth every rational nature ; [so that] it 
was not lawful that aught generable should be made like 
unto Him who is beyond the Reason, and established in 
the most excellent and the most singular Idea [of all].” 

1 Quod Deus Im., § 6; M. i. 277, P. 298 (Ri. ii. 72, 73). 

2 Leg. Alleg., § 21; M. i. 82, P. 1103 (Ri. i. 113). 

3 Of. Gen. i. 27. Philo reads év eié: instead of the «ar’ elxdva 
of LXX., and ézofnoa instead of érotnce. 

4 Namely, in His Reason. The Greek text is quoted by 
Eusebius, Prep. Evang., vii. 13 (M. ii. 625, Ri. vi. 175), who gives 
it as from Bk. i. of Quest. et Solut. The original text is lost, but 


we have a Latin Version—g.v. ii. § 62 (Ri. vi. 356)—which, how- 
ever, in this instance, has made sorry havoc of the original. 


See 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 231 


From this passage we see that though it is true Philo 
calls the Logos the “second God,” he does not depart 
from his fundamental monotheism, for the Logos is not 
an entity apart from God, but the Reason of God. 
Nevertheless, this solitary phrase of Philo’s is almost 
invariably trotted out in the forefront of all enquiry 
into Philo’s Logos-doctrine, in order that the difference 
between this phrase and the wording of the Proem to 
the Fourth Gospel may be insisted on as strongly as 
possible for controversial apologetical purposes. 

That, however, Philo is a strict monotheist may be 
seen from the following passage, in which he is com- 
menting on the words of Gen. xxxi. 13: “I am the God 
who was seen by thee in the place of God” —where, 
apparently, two Gods are referred to. 

“ What, then, should we say? The true God is one; 
they who are called gods, by a misuse of the term, are 
many. On which account the Holy Word? has, on the 
present occasion, indicated the true [God] by means of 
the article, saying: ‘I am the God’; but the [one so 
named] by misuse of the term, without the article, 
saying: ‘who was seen by thee in the place,’ not of the 
God, but only ‘of God.” And what he (Moses) here 
calls ‘God’ is His Most Ancient Word (Logos).” * 


THE Locos 1s Lire AND LIGHT 


This Logos, moreover, is Life and Light. For, 
speaking of Intelligible or Incorporeal “Spirit” and 
“ Light,” Philo writes : 


1 Philo and LXX. both have: “ éyé elus 6 geds 6 dp0els cor 
éy téry Gcod” ; whereas A.V. translates: “I am the God of 
Beth-el ”—that is, the “ House or Place of El or God.” 

2 Here meaning the Inspiration of Scripture. 

3 De Som., i. § 39 ; M. i. 655, P. 599 (Ri. iii, 262, 263). 


232 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“The former he [‘ Moses’] called the Breath of God, 
because it is the most life-giving thing [in the universe], 
and God is the cause of life; and the latter the Light 
[of God], because it is by far the most beautiful thing 
[in the universe]. 

“For by so much more glorious and more brilliant is 
the intelligible [Light] than the visible, as, methinks, 
the sun is than darkness, and day than night, and the 
mind, which is the guide of the whole soul, than the 
sensible means of discernment, and the eyes than the 
body. 

“And he calls the invisible and intelligible Divine 
Reason (Logos) the Image of God. And of this [Image] 
the image [in its turn] is that intelligible light, which 
has been created as the image of the Divine Reason 
who interprets it [that is, Light’s] creation. 

“[This Light] is the [One] Star, beyond [all] heavens, 
the Source of the Stars that are visible to the senses, 
which it would not be beside the mark to call All- 
brilliancy, and from which the sun and moon and the 
rest of the stars, both errant and fixed, draw their 
light, each according to its power.” ! 

The necessity and reason of forming some such 
concept of the Logos is that man cannot bear the utter 
transcendency of God in His absoluteness. And apply- 
ing this idea further to theophanies in human form, 
Philo writes : 

For just as those who are unable to look at the 
sun itself look upon its reflected rays as the sun, and 
the [light-] changes round the moon, as the moon itself, 
so also do men regard the Image of God, His Angel, 
Reason (Logos), as Himself.” 2 

1 De Mund. Op., § 8; M. i. 6, 7, P. 6 (Ri. i. 11). 
2 De Som, § 41; M. i. 657, P. 600 (Ri. iii. 264). 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 233 


~ 


THE DIVINE VISION 


Such Divine Vision is the object of the contemplative 
life, for : 

“Tt is the special gift of those who dedicate them- 
selves to the service (@eparevovrwy) of That - which- 
is ... to ascend by means of their rational faculties 
to the height of the xther, setting before themselves 
‘Moses ’—the Race that is the friend of God, as the 
leader of the way. 

“For then they will behold ‘the place that is clear, ? 
on which the immovable and unchangeable God hath 
set His feet, and the [regions] beneath His feet, as it 
were a work of sapphire stone, and as it might be the 
form of the firmament of heaven, the sensible cosmos, 
which he [‘ Moses’] symbolises by these things. 

“For it is seemly that those who have founded a 
brotherhood for the sake of wisdom, should long to see 
Him; and if they cannot do this, to behold at least 
His Image, Most Holy Reason (Zogos),? and after him 
also the most perfect work in [all] things sensible, 
[namely] this cosmos. 

“For the work of philosophy is naught else than the 
striving clearly to see these things.” + 


Tue Sons oF Gop oN EARTH 


And later on, in the same treatise (§ 28), Philo writes 
still more interestingly and instructively as follows: 


1 This is the Race of the Logos. 

2 Of. Ex. xxiv. 10, A.V. does not render this reading, but 
LXX. gives “The place where the God of Israel stood.” 

3 Which here, asalso above, Philo would equate with the “ Place 
of God.” 

* De Confus. Ling. § 20; M. i. 419, P. 333, 334 (Ri. ii. 
. 268, 269). | 


234 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“ But they who have attained unto wisdom, are, as they 
should be, called Sons of the One God, as Moses admits 
when he says: ‘ Ye are the Sons of the Lord God,’! and 
‘God who begat thee,’? and ‘Is not He Himself thy 
father??? . . 

“ And if a man should not as yet have the good for- 
tune to be worthy to be called a Son of God, let him 
strive manfully to set himself in order according to 
His First-born Reason (Logos), the Oldest Angel, who is 
as though it were the Angel-chief, of many names; for 
he is called Dominion,‘ and Name of God, and Reason, 
and the Man-after-the-likeness, and Seeing Israel. 

“ And for this reason I was induced a little before 
to praise the principles of them who say: ‘ We are all 
Sons of One Man.’® Foreven if we have not yet become 
fit to be judged Sons of God, we may at anyrate be Sons 
of His Eternal Likeness, His Most Holy Reason; for 
Reason, the Eldest [of all Angels], is God’s Likeness [or 
Image].” ® 

And so also we read elsewhere: 

“ But the Reason (Logos) is God’s Likeness, by whom 
[sc. Reason] the whole Cosmos was fashioned.” ? 

This Divine Reason of things, then, was the means by 
which the Cosmos came into existence. And so we 
find Philo writing : ; 

“But if anyone should wish to make use of naked 


1 Deut. xiv. 1. A.V.: “Ye are the children of the Lord your 
God.” LXX.: “Ye are the sons of the Lord your God.” 

2 Deut. xxxii. 18. A.V.: “God that formed thee.” LXX. has 
the same reading as Philo. 

3 Deut, xxxii. 6. 

* &pxh, or Source, Beginning, as in the Proem to the Fourth 
Gospel. 

5 Gen, xlii. 11. 

6 De Confus. Ling., § 28 ; M. i. 426, 427, P. 341 (Ri. ii. 279). 

7 De Monareh., ii. § 5; M. ii. 225, P. 823 (Ri. iv. 302). 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 235 


terms, he might say that the intelligible order of things? 
is nothing else than the Reason (Logos) of God per- 
petually creating the [sensible] world-order. 


THE City or Gop 


“For the Intelligible City is nothing else but the 
reasoning of the Architect determining in His Mind to 
found a city perceivable by the senses after [the model 
of] the City which the mind alone can perceive. 

“This is the doctrine of Moses and not [only] mine. 
At anyrate in describing the genesis of man he ex- 
pressly agrees that he [man] was fashioned in the image 
of God. And if this is the case with the part—the 
image of the Image—it is plainly also the case with the 
whole Form, that is the whole of this sensible cosmos, 
which is a [far] greater imitation of the Divine Image 
than the human image is. 

“It is plain, moreover, that the Archetypal Seal, 
which we call Cosmos which is perceptible only to the 
intellect, must itself be the Archetypal Pattern,? the 
Idea of ideas, the Reason (Logos) of God.” ? 

And elsewhere also he writes: 

“Passing, then, from details, behold the grandest 
House or City, namely, this cosmos. Thou shalt find 
that the cause of it is God, by whom it came into exist- 
ence. The matter of it is the four elements, out of 
which it has been composed. The instrument by means 
of which it has been built, is the Reason (Logos) of God. 
And the object of its building is the Goodness of the 
Creator.” 4 

And again: 

1 Or the cosmos, which is comprehensible by the intellect alone. 

2 Or Paradigm. 
3 De Mund. Op., § 6; M.i. 5, P. 5 (Ri. i. 9), 
4 De Cherub., § 35; M. i. 162, P. 129 (Ri. i, 228). 


236 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Gop’s SHADOW 


“Now the Reason (Zogos) is the Likeness of God, by 
which the whole cosmos was made.” ! 

And still more clearly : 

“But God’s Shadow is His Reason (Logos), which 
using, as it were an instrument, He made the cosmos. 
And this Shadow is as it were the Archetypal Model of 
allelse. For that as God is the Original of His Image, 
which he [‘ Moses’] now calls [His] Shadow, so, [in its 
turn] that Image is the model of all else, as he [‘ Moses ”] 
showed when, at the beginning of the law-giving, he 
said: ‘And God made man according to the Image of 
God,’ 2—this Likeness being imaged according to God, 
and man being imaged according to this Likeness, 
which received the power of its Original.” 3 

Moreover, the Divine Reason, as an instrument, is 
regarded as the means of separation and division: 

“So God, having sharpened His Reason (Logos), the 
Divider of all things, cut off both the formless and 
undifferentiated essence of all things, and the four 
elements of cosmos which had been separated out of 
it,* and the animals and plants which had been com- 
pacted by means of these.” ® 

With this we may compare the following passage 
from The Acts of John, where we read of the Logos: 

“But what it is in truth, as conceived of in itself, 
and as spoken of to thee,°—it is the marking-off [or 
delimitation] of all things, the firm necessity of those 

1 De Monarch., ii. § 5; M. ii. 225, P. 823 (Ri. iv. 302). 

2 Gen. i. 26. 

3 Leg. Alleg., iii. § 31; M. i. 106, 107, P. 79 (Ri. i. 152, 153). 

4 Sc. the essence. 

5 Sc. elements. Quis Rer. Div. Her., § 27; M. i. 492, P. 500 
(Ri. iii. 32), 

6 John, to whom the Master is speaking. 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 237 


things that are fixed and were unsettled, the Harmony 
of Wisdom.” } 

But to return to the concept of the Logos as symbolised 
by the idea of a City; speaking of the six “cities of 
refuge,” Philo allegorises them as follows: 

“Ts not, then, the most ancient and most secure and 
best Mother-city, and not merely City, the Divine Reason 
(Logos), to which it is of the greatest service to flee first ? 

“The other five, as though they were colonies [from 
it], are the Powers of the Speaker [of this Word 
(Logos) |, of which the chief is the Creative [Potency], 
according to which He who creates by Reason [or Word], 
fashioned the cosmos. The second is the Sovereign 
[Potency], according to which He who created, ruleth 
that which is brought into existence. The third is the 
Merciful [Potency], by means of which the Artist hath 
compassion and hath mercy on His own work. The 
fourth is the Legislative Providence, by means of which 
He doth forbid the things that may not be. . ...”? 

Philo then regards these “cities” as symbolising the 
refuges to which the various kinds of erring souls 
should flee to find comfort. If the Divine Reason, and 
the Creative and Sovereign (Kingly) Powers are too 
far off for the comprehension of the sinner’s ignorance, 
then he should flee to other goals at a shorter distance, 
the “cities” of the Necessary Powers, namely, the 
Powers of Mercy and of the Law, which latter are 
twofold, Enjoining and Forbidding, the latter again of 
which is referred to vaguely, at the end of the chapter, 
as the “averting of evils” without further definition. 


1 F. F. F., 436. 

2 De Prof., § 18; M. i. 560, P. 464 (Ri. iii. 130). There is un- 
fortunately a lacuna in the text, so that we do not learn the char- 
acteristics of the fifth potency ; but this is explained elsewhere,— 
the Legislative Providence being a twofold potency, namely, the 
Enjoining and the Forbidding. 


238 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Moreover, Philo continues, there are symbols of these 
five Potencies mentioned in the Scriptures: 

“(The symbols] of Command and Prohibition are the 
[two tables of the] laws in the ark; of the Merciful 
Potency, the top of the ark, which he [‘ Moses’] calls 
the Mercy-seat; of the Creative and Sovereign 
[Potencies], the winged Cherubim, who are set over it. 

“But the Divine Reason (Logos) above them did not 
take any visible shape, inasmuch as no sensible object 
answers to it, for it is the very Likeness of God, the 
Eldest of all beings, one and all, which are cognisable by 
mind alone, the nearest to the [One and] Only One- 
that-is, without a space of any kind between, copied 
inerrantly. 

“For it is said: ‘I will speak to thee from above 
the Mercy-seat, from between the two Cherubim.’! 

“So that he who drives the Chariot ? of the Powers is 
the Word (Logos), and He who is borne in the Chariot 
is He who speaks [the Word], giving commandment to 
the Driver for the right driving of the universe,” * 


THE TRUE SHEPHERD 


Again, speaking of God as the True Shepherd of the 
universe and all things therein, the elements and all 
therein, the sun, moon, and planets, the stars and 
heavens, Philo writes: 

“(He placed] at the head His own True Reason 
(Logos), His First-born Son, who shall succeed unto the 
care of this sacred flock, as though he were the lieutenant 
of the Great King.” * 

1 Ex, xxv, 22. 

2 This plainly refers to the Mercabah or Chariot of the Vision 
of Ezechiel. 

3 De Prof., § 19; M. i. 561, P. 465 (Ri. iii. 131). 

4 De Agric., § 12; M.i. 308, P. 195 (Ri. ii. 116). 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 239 


The Divine Reason of things, moreover, is regarded 
as the Pléréma or Fullness of all powers,—ideal space, 
and ideal time, if such terms can be permitted. The 
Logos is the Aton or Eternity proper. And so Philo 
speaks of : 

“The Divine Reason (Logos) whom God Himself 
hath full-filled entirely and throughout with incorporeal 
powers,” } 


THE APOSTLES OF GOD 


This Supreme Logos, then, is filled full of powers— 
words, Jogoi, in their turn, energies of God. As Philo 
writes : 

“For God not disdaining to descend into the sensible 
world, sends forth as His apostles His own ‘words’ (logoz) 
to give succour to those who love virtue; and they act 
as physicians and expel the diseases of the soul.” 2 

These “ words” or “reasons” are men’s angels; they 
are the “light-sparks” or “rays” in the heart—of 
which we hear so much in “Gnostic” and allied litera- 
ture—all from the Father-Sun, the Light of God, or 
Logos proper, which Philo calls “the Light of the 
invisible and supremest Deity that rays and shines 
transcendently on every side.” 


THE LADDER OF THE “ WoRDS” 


“When this Light shineth into the mind, the 
secondary beams of the ‘words’ (logoi) set [or are 
hidden].” * 

In treating of the allegorical Ladder set up from 
earth to heaven, Philo first gives what he considers to 

1 De Som., i. § 11; M. i. 630, P. 574 (Ri. iii. 227). 


2 Ibid., § 12; M.i. 631, P. 575 (Ri. iii, 229). 
34Thid., § 13. 


240 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


be its cosmic correspondences and then applies the 
figure to the little world of man: 

“The ladder (xAqua€), then, symbolically spoken of, 
is in the cosmos somewhat of the nature I have 
suggested. But if we turn our attention to it in man, 
we shall find it is the soul; the foot of which is as it 
were its earthly part—namely, sensation, while its head 
is as it were its heavenly part—the purest mind. 

“Up and down through all of it the ‘words’ (logoz) 
go incessantly ; whenever they ascend, drawing it up 
together with them, divorcing it from its mortal nature, 
and revealing the sight of those things which alone are 
worth the seeing ;—not that when they descend they 
cast it down, for neither God nor yet God’s Word 
(Zogos) is cause of any loss. 

“But they accompany them! [in their descent] for 
love of man and pity of our race, to succour, and give 
help, that they, by breathing into them their saving 
breaths, may bring the soul to life, tossed as it is upon 
the body [’s waves] as on a river [’s bosom]. 

“Tt is the God and Governor of the universe alone 
who doth, transcending sound and sight, walk ’mid the 
minds of them who have been throughly purified. For 
them there is an oracle, which the sage prophesied, in 
which is said: ‘I will walk amid you; and I will be 
your God.’? 

“But in the minds of them who are still being 
washed, and have not yet had throughly cleansed the 
life that is befouled and stained with bodies’ grossness, 
it is the angels, the ‘ words’ (Jogoi) divine, making them 
bright for Virtue’s eyes.” ® 

This Light of God is, as has repeatedly been said 
before, the Divine Reason of things. 


1 Sc. the souls. 2 Lev. xxvi. 12. 
3 De Som., § 23; M. i. 642, 643, P. 587 (Ri. iii. 245, 246). 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 241 


“* For the Lord is my Light and my Saviour,’! as is 
sung in the Hymns ;—{He is] not only Light, but the 
Archetype of every other light ; nay rather more ancient 
and sublime than the Archetypal Model [of all things], 
in that this [latter] is His Word (Zogos). For the 
[Universal] Model is His all-full? Word, the Light, 
while He Himself is like to naught of things created.” 


THE LoGos THE SPIRITUAL SUN 


This Word, or Logos, is further symbolised among 
phenomena as the sun. The Spiritual Sun is the Divine 
Reason—“ the intelligible Model of the [sun] that 
moves in heaven.” 

“For the Word (Logos) of God, when it enters into 
our earthly constitution, succours and aids those who 
are Virtue’s kinsmen, and those that are favourably 
disposed to her, affording them a perfect place of refuge 
and salvation, and shedding on their foes* destruction 
and ruin past repair.” ° 

The Logos is thus naturally the panacea of all ills. 

“For the Word (Logos) is, as it were, the saving 
medicine for all the wounds and passions of the soul, 
which [Word], the lawgiver declares, we should restore 
‘before the sun’s going down’*®—that is, before the 


1 Ps, xxvii, 1. A.V. “salvation.” LXX. reads gwricuds, 
“illumination ”—a technical term among the mystics of Early 
Christendom for baptism—instead of the ¢4s of Philo. 

2 That is, the Logos as Plérdma. 

3 De Som., § 13. 4 Sc. the vices of the soul, 

5 Ibid., § 15; M. i. 363, P. 578 (Ri. iii, 232). 

6 This seems to be somewhat reminiscent of the custom of 
evening prayer in the Therapeut and other similar communities, 
when, at the time of the setting of the sun, it was enjoined that 
“rational” praises should be restored or given back to God, for 
benefits received. 

Philo, however, is here somewhat laboriously commenting, in 

VOL. I. 16 


242 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


most brilliant rays of God, supremest and most mani- 
fest, go down [or set]—[rays] which through His pity 
for our race He has sent forth from [His high] Heaven 
into the mind of man. 

“For whilst that Light most Godlike abideth in the 
soul, we shall restore the ‘ word’ (logos) that hath been 
given to us in pledge, as though it were a garment, 
that it may be to him who doth receive it, the special 
property of man—[a garment] both to cover up the 
shame! of life, and to enjoy the gift of God and have 
respite in quietude, by reason of the present help of 
such a counsellor, and of a shielder such as will never 
leave the rank in which he hath been stationed.” ? 

From all of which it seems that Philo is drawing a 
distinction between the Pure Light of the Logos and 
the reflection of that Light in the reason of man, for 
he goes on to say: 

“Indeed we have prolonged this long excursus for no 
other reason than to explain that the trained mind, 
moved by irregular motions to productiveness and its 
contrary, and, as it were, continually ascending and 
descending [the ladder]|—when it is productive and 
raised into the height, then is it bathed in radiance of 
the archetypal immaterial rays of the Logic? Source of 
God who bringeth all unto perfection; and when it 
doth descend and is barren, it is illumined by their 
allegorical fashion, on the pawnbroking bye-law in Ex. xxii. 26, 
27: “But if thou takest in pledge thy neighbour’s garment, thou 
shalt give it him back before the going down of the sun. For 
this is his covering ; this is the only garment of his indecency. 
In what [else] shall he sleep? If, then, he shall cry unto me, I 
will give ear to him; for I am pitiful.” (See § 16.) The A.V. 
translates otherwise. 

1 Of. the well-known logos from the Gospel according to the 
Egyptians, “ Unless ye tread on the garment of shame.” 

2 De Som., § 18; M. i. 637, P. 582 (Ri. iii. 238). 

3 Or Rational. 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 243 


images, the ‘ words’ (/ogot) immortal, whom it is custom 
to call angels.” ? 


THE DISCIPLES OF THE LOGOS 


And a little later on Philo proceeds to speak of those 
who are disciples or pupils of the Holy Word or Divine 
Reason. 

“These are they who are truly men, lovers of 
temperance, and orderliness, and modesty,”—whose life 
he proceeds further to describe in similar terms to those 
he uses of the Therapeuts. 

Such a life, he concludes, “is adapted not for 
those who are called men, but for those who are 
truly so.”? 

For those, then, who consciously set their feet upon 
the ladder of true manhood, there is a Way up even to 
Deity Itself, for Philo writes : 

“ Stability, and sure foundation, and eternally abid- 
ing in the same, changeless and immovable, is, in the 
first place, a characteristic of That-which-is; and, in 
the second, [a characteristic] of the Reason (Logos) 
of That-which-is—which Reason He hath called his 
Covenant; in the third, of the wise man; and in the 
fourth, of him who goeth forward [towards wisdom].” * 

How, then, continues Philo, can the wicked mind 
think that it can stand alone—‘ when it is swept 
hither and thither by the eddies of passion, which carry 
the body forth to burial as a corpse? ” 

And a little later on he proceeds to tell us that Eden 
must be taken to stand for the Wisdom of God. 


1 Ibid., $19; M. i. 638, P. 582 (Ri. iii, 239). 

2 Tbid., 20; M. i. 639, P. 584 (Ri. iii. 241). Of. OC. H,, x. (xi) 
24, 

3 De Som. ii. § 36; M. i. 690, P. 1140 (Ri, iii. 312). 


244 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“ And the Divine Reason (Logos) floweth down like 
a river, from Wisdom, as from a source, that it may 
irrigate and water the heavenly shoots and plants of 
Virtue-lovers, that grow upon the sacred Mountain of 
the Gods,! as though it were a paradise. 


THE RIVER OF THE DIVINE REASON 


“ And this Holy Reason is divided into four sources 
—I mean it is separated into four virtues—each of 
which is a queen. For its being divided into sources ? 
does not bear any resemblance to division of space, but 
rather to a sovereignty,® in order that, having pointed 
to the virtues, as its boundaries, he [‘Moses’] may 
immediately display the wise man, who makes use of 
these virtues, as king, elected to kingship, not by the 
show of men’s hands, but by choice of that Nature 
[namely, Virtue] which alone is truly free, and Beneihe, 
and above all bribes. .. . 

“ Accordingly, one of the companions of Moses, 
likening this Word (Logos) to a. river, says in the 
Hymns: ‘The river of God was filled with water.’ * 

“Now it is absurd that any of the rivers flowing on 
earth should be so called; but,as it seems, he [the 
psalmist] clearly signifies the Divine Reason (Logos), 
full of the flood of Wisdom, having no part of itself 
bereft or empty [thereof], but rather, as has been said, 
being entirely diffused throughout the universe, and 
[again] raised up to the height [thereof], by reason of 

1 Lit., Olympian. 

2 &pxat mean sources, but also principles and sovereignties. 
It is, however, impossible to keep the word-play in English. 

3 Or kingdom, namely, “of the heavens,” or rulership of the 
celestial realms, or rather of one’s self. 


4 Ps. Ixv. 9. So also LXX.; but A.V., “Thou greatly en- 
richest it with the river of God, which is full of water.” 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 245 


the perpetual and continuous [circling] course of that 
eternally flowing fountain. 

“There is also the following song-verse : ‘The rapid 
flow of the river maketh glad the city of God.’! 


JERUSALEM ABOVE 


“What kind of city? For what is now the holy 
city,? in which is the holy temple, was founded at a 
distance from sea and rivers; so that it is clear that 
[the writer] intends to represent by means of an under- 
meaning something different from the surface-sense. 

_ “For indeed the stream of the Divine Reason (Logos) 
continually flowing on with rapidity and regularity, 
diffuses all things through all and maketh them glad. 

“ And in one sense he calls cosmos the City of God, 
inasmuch as, receiving the whole cup® of the Divine 
draught it . . .,f and, being made joyous, it shouteth 
with a joy that can never be taken away or quenched 
for the eternity. 

“ But in another sense [he uses it of] the soul of the 
wise man, in which God is said to walk as in a city, for 
‘I will walk in you and I will be your God.’ 

“And for the happy soul that stretches forth its 
own reasoning® as a most holy drinking vessel ’—who 
is it that poureth forth the sacred measures of true joy, 
if not the cup-bearer of God, the [Divine] Reason (Logos), 
who is master of the feast ?—he who differs not from 

1 Ps, xlvi. 4. LXX. has the plural, rivers or streams. A.V. 
translates : “ There is a river the streams whereof shall make glad 
the city of God.” 

2 The physical Jerusalem in Palestine. 

3 xparijpa—lit., crater or mixing-bowl. 

4 A lacuna occurs here in the text. 


5 A loose quotation of Lev. xxvi. 12, as already cited above. 
6 royiopudv. 7 xmwpa. 


246 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


the draught, but is himself unmingled delight, and 
sweetness, forthpouring, good-cheer, the immortal philtre 
of all joy and of contentment,—if we may use the words 
of poetry. 

“But the City of God the Hebrews call Jerusalem, 
which by interpretation signifies the ‘Sight of Peace.’ 
Wherefore seek not the City of That-which-is in 
regions of the earth—for ’tis not made of stocks and 
stones ; but [seek it] in the soul that doth not war, but 
offers unto them of the keen sight a life of contemplation 
and of peace.” 4 

This, then, is how Philo understands the New Jeru- 
salem (or Ogdoad), so familiar to us from the writings 
of the “ Gnostic ” schools, beyond which was the Plérdma 
or Treasure of Light. For elsewhere he writes: 

“ He will offer a fair and fitting prayer, as Moses did, 
that God may open for us His Treasure, yea [His] 
Reason (Logos) sublime, and pregnant with lights divine, 
which he [‘ Moses ’] has called Heaven.” 2 

These “lights” are “reasons” (logot), for a little 
further on he says: 

“Thou seest that the soul is not nourished with 
things earthly and contemptible, but by the reasons 
God rains down from His sublime and pure nature, 
which he [‘ Moses’] calls Heaven.” * 


THE Locos Is AS MANNA AND CORIANDER SEED 


And a little further on, referring to the allegorical 
“manna,” or heavenly food, “the bread which the Lord 
hath given you to eat” (Ex. xvi. 13), he writes: 


1 De Som., ii. §§ 37-39 ; M. i. 690-692, P. 1141, 1142 (Ri. iii. 
312-315). | . 

2 Leg. Alleg., iii. §34; M. i. 108, P. 80 (Ri. i. 155). 

3 Ibid., § 56; M. i, 119, P. 90 (Ri. i. 170). 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 247 


“ Dost thou not see the food of the soul, what it is ? 
It is the Continuing Reason (Logos) of God, like unto 
dew, encircling the whole of it [the soul] on all sides, 
and suffering no part of it to be without its share of 
it [the Logos]. 

“But this Reason is not apparent everywhere, but 
[only] in the man who is destitute of passions and vices ; 
yea, subtle is it for the mind to distinguish, or to be 
distinguished by the mind, exceedingly translucent and 
pure for sight to see. 

“Tt is, moreover, as it were, a coriander seed! For 
agriculturalists declare that the seed of the coriander 
can be divided and dissected infinitely, and that every 
single part and section [thereof], when sown, comes up 
just as the whole seed. Such also is the Reason (Logos) 
of God, profitable in its entirety and in every part, 
however small it be.” 2 

And he adds a little further on: 

“This is the teaching of the hierophant and prophet, 
Moses, who will say: ‘This is the bread, the food 
which God hath given to the soul,* that He hath 
given [us] for meat and drink, His own Word,‘ His 
own Reason,’ for this [Reason] is the bread which He 
hath given us to eat; this is the Word.” ® 


THE Locos Is THE PupiIL oF Gopn’s EYE 


Philo also likens the Divine Reason to the pupil of 
the eye—a figure that will meet us later in considering 
the meaning of the Kopy Koopov (“Virgin of the 
World”) treatise—for he writes: 

1 The grain of mustard seed of the Gospels and of the “ Gnostics.” 

2 Ibid., § 59 ; M. i. 121, 122, P. 92 (Ri. i. 172, 178). 

3 A gloss on Ex. xiv. 15. 

* piiua. 5 rAdyos. 

6 Leg. Alleg., iii, § 0; M. i. 121, P. 92 (Ri. i. 178). 


248 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“ May not [this Reason] be also likened to the pupil 
of the eye? For just as the eye’s pupil, though the 
smallest part [of it], does yet behold all of the zones of 
things existing—the boundless sea, and vastness of the 
air, and all of the whole heaven which the sun doth 
bound from east to west,—so is the sight of the Divine 
Reason the keenest sight of all, so that it can behold 
all things ; by which [men] shall behold things worthy 
to be seen beyond white [light]? itself. 

“For what could be more bright or more far-seeing 
than Reason Divine, by shining in which the other 
[lights] drive out all mist and darkness, striving to 
blend themselves with the soul’s light.” ? 


“ MAN SHALL NOT LIVE BY BREAD ALONE” — 


And again, in a passage of intense interest we read: 
“For He nourisheth us with His Reason (Logos)— 
the most general [of all things]... . And the Reason 
of God is above the whole cosmos; it is the most 
ancient and most general of all the things that are. 
“This Reasén the ‘fathers’? knew not,—not [our] 
true [eternal] fathers, but those hoary in time, who 
say: ‘Let us take a leader, and let us return unto’— 
the passions of —‘ Egypt.’ ¢ 
“Therefore let God announce His [good] tidings to 
the soul in an image: ‘Man shall not live by bread 
alone, but by every word® that proceedeth out of the 
mouth of God,’ ®*—that is, he shall be nourished by the 
whole of Reason (Logos) and by [every] part of it. 
For ‘mouth’ is a symbol of the [whole] Logos, and 
‘word’ is its part.” 7 
1 The reading seems to be faulty,  ? Ibid., § 59. 
3 Of. Deut. viii. 13. # Num. xiv. 4, 


5 Shuari, § Deut. viii. 3. 
7 Leg. Alleg., iii. § 61; M. i. 121, P. 93 (Ri. i. 174), 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 249 


These “fathers,” then, are those of the lower nature, 
and not our true spiritual parents; it is these “fathers ” 
that we are to abandon. 

Compare with this Matt. x. 37: “He who loveth 
father and mother more than Me is not worthy of Me” 
and the far more striking form of the tradition in Luke 
xiv. 26: “If any man cometh unto Me, and doth not 
hate his own father and mother and wife and children 
and brethren and sisters, yea and his own soul also, he 
cannot be My disciple.” 

In the Gnostic gospel, known as the Pistis Sophia 
(341), the mystic meaning of these parents is given at 
length, as signifying the rulers of the lower nature, 
and the Master is made to say: “For this cause have I 
said unto you aforetime, ‘He who shall not leave father 
and mother to follow after Me is not worthy of Me.’ 
_ What I said then was,‘ Ye shall leave your parents 
the rulers, that ye may be children of the First Ever- 
lasting Mystery.’” 

But the most arresting point is that Matt. iv. 4, in 
the story of the Temptation, quotes precisely the same 
words of the LXX. text of Deut. viii. 3 which Philo 
does, beginning where he does and finishing where he 
does, both omitting the final and tautological “shall 
man live”—a very curious coincidence. Luke iv. 4 
preserves only the first half of the sentence; but it 
evidently lay in exactly the same form in which Philo 
uses it before the first and third Evangelists in their 
second or “ Logia” source. It was, then, presumably a 
frequently quoted text. 


THE Locos-MEDIATOR 


The Divine Reasonis further figured as a true “ Person,” 
the Mediator between Godand man. Thus Philo writes: 


250 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“ And on His angel-ruling and most ancient Reason 
(Logos), the Father who created all, hath bestowed 
a special gift—that standing between them as a 
Boundary,’ he may distinguish creature from Creator. 

“ He [the Reason] ever is himself the suppliant unto 
the Incorruptible on mortal kind’s behalf in its distress, 
and is the King’s ambassador to subject nature. 

“And he exulteth in his gift, and doth majesticly 
insist thereon, declaring: ‘ Yea, have I stood between 
the Lord and you,’*—not increate as God, nor yet 
create as ye, but in the midst between the [two] 
extremes, hostage to both: to Him who hath created 
him, for pledge that the creature never will remove itself 
entirely [from Him], nor make revolt, choosing disorder 
in order’s place; and to the thing created for good hope 
that God, the Merciful, will never disregard the work 
of His own hands. ‘For I will herald forth the news 
of peace to the creation from Him who knows how to 
make wars to cease, from God the Everlasting Peace- 
keeper.’” 3 

In considering what is claimed to be the elaborate 
symbolism of the sacred vestments of the High Priest, 
and the nature of this symbolical office, Philo declares 
that the twelve stones upon the breast of the High 
Priest, in four rows of three each, are a symbol of the 
Divine Reason (Logos), which holds together and regu- 
lates the universe; this breastplate, then, is the logion 
or sacred oracle of God. 

“For it was necessary that he who was consecrated 
to the Father of the cosmos, should have [His] Son, 


1 Of. the “Gnostic” Horos (not the Egyptian Horus) as 
referred to previously. 

2 Perhaps a reflection of Num. xvi. 48. 

3 Quis Rer. Div. Her. § 42; M. i. 501, 502, P. 504 (Ri. iii. 
45, 46). 


arr ree Sie 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 251 


the most perfect in virtue, as intercessor,’ both for the 
forgiveness? of sins, and for the abundant supply of 
the most unstinted blessings. 

“It probably also imparts the preliminary teaching 
to the Servant of God, that if he cannot be worthy of 
Him who made the cosmos, he should nevertheless 
without ceasing strive to be worthy of that cosmos; 
for when he has [once] been clothed with its likeness,‘ 
he is bound forthwith, by carrying about the image of 


the model ® in his head, of his own self to change him- 


self as though it were from man into the nature of the 
cosmos, and, if we ought to say so®—nay, he who 
speaks on truth ought to speak truth !—be [himself] a 
little cosmos.” 7 


THE YoGa OF PLOTINUS 


With these most instructive indications we may 
compare the intensely interesting passage of Plotinus 
in his essay “On Intelligible Beauty,” where he gives 
his yoga-system, so to speak. It is perhaps the most 
important passage that has come down to us from the 
corypheus of Later Platonism, giving, as it does, in 
every probability, the method of the school whereby 
ecstasis was attained. 


1 rapaxafre—as paraclete, or intercessor, or defender (a term 
of the law courts), or comforter. 

2 auynorelay—lit., amnesty, or forgetfulness of wrong. 

3 by Tod be0d Ocparevr4yv—the Therapeut. 

4 The dress of the High Priest, then, symbolised the cosmos— 
the elements, etc. May we deduce from this that in one of the 
Therapeut initiations the approyed candidate was clothed in such 
a symbolic robe ? 

5 Sc. the Logos as cosmos, 

6 Signifying a religious scruple as referring to a matter of 
initiation. 

T De Vit. Mos., iii. § 14; M. ii, 155, P. 673 (Ri. iv. 212, 213). 


re oe 


352 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“Let us, then, form a mental image of this cosmos 
with each of its parts remaining what it is, and yet 
interpenetrating one another, [imagining] them all 
together into one as much as we possibly can,—so that 
whatsoever one comes first into the mind as the ‘one’ 
(as for instance the outer sphere), there immediately 
follows also the sight of the semblance of the sun, and 
together with it that of the other stars,! and the earth, 
and sea, and all things living, as though in [one] 
transparent sphere,—in fine, as though all things — 
could be seen in it. 

“Let there, then, be in the soul some semblance of 
a sphere of light [transparent], having all things in it, 
whether moving or still, or some of them moving and 
others still. 

“ And, holding this [sphere] in the mind, conceive in 
thy self another [sphere], removing [from it all idea of] 
mass; take from it also [the idea of] space, and the 
phantom of matter in thy mind; and do not try toimage 
another sphere [merely] less in bulk than the former. 

“Then invoking God who hath made [that true sphere] 
of which thou holdest the phantom [in thy mind], pray 
that He may come. 

“ And may He come with his own cosmos, with all 
the Gods therein—He being one and all, and each one 
all, united into one, yet different in their powers, and 
yet, in that one [power] of multitude all one. 

“ Nay, rather the One God is all [the Gods] for that 
He falleth not short [of Himself] though all of them 
are [from Him]; [and] they are all together, yet each 
again apart in [some kind of] an unextended state, 
possessing no form perceptible to sense. 

1 Presumably the seven “planetary spheres” of. “ difference,” 


as set forth in Plato’s Timeus. 
2 Sc. the intelligible or spiritual world-order. 


- 


PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA 253 


“ For, otherwise, one would be in one place, another 
in another, and [each] be ‘each, and not ‘all’ in itself, 
without parts other from the others and [other] from 
itself. 

‘Nor is each whole a power divided and proportioned 
according to a measurement of parts; but this [whole] 
is the all, all power, extending infinitely and infinitely 
powerful ;—nay, so vast is that [divine world-order ‘J, 
that even its ‘parts’ are infinite.” ? 


THe Race or Gop 


But to return to Philo. The rational soul or mind 
of man is potentially the Intelligible Cosmos or Logos ; 
thus he writes : 

“The great Moses did not call the species of the 
rational soul by a name resembling any one of the things 
created, but he called it the image of the Divine and 
Invisible, deeming it a true [image] brought into being 
and impressed with the soul of God, of which the 
Signet is the Eternal Reason (ZLogos).” ® 

All of which the disciplined soul shall realise in 
himself. Of such a man Abraham is a type, for: 

“Abandoning mortal things, he ‘is added to the 
people of God,’* plucking the fruit of immortality, 
having become equal to the angels. For the angels are 
the host of God, incorporeal and happy souls.” 


1 Intelligible cosmos. ‘ 

2 Ennead, V. viii. (cap. ix.), 550 a-p.; Plot. Op. Om., ed. F. 
Creuzer (Oxford, 1835), ii. 1016, 1017. M. N. Bouillet—in Les 
Ennéades de Plotin (Paris, 1861), iii. 122, 123—gives, as usual, an 
excellently clear rendering, but it is not easy to recognise some of 
his sentences in the text. 

3 De Plant. Noe, § 5; M. i. 332, P. 216, 217 (Ri. ii. 148). 

4A gloss on Gen, xxv. 8: “And was added (A.V. gathered) to 
his people.” 


254 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


The angels are the “people” of God; but there is a 
still higher degree of union, whereby a man becomes 
one of the “ Race” or “Kin” of God. This “ Race” is an 
intimate union of all them who are “kin to Him”; they 
become one. For this Race “is one, the highest one, but 
‘people’ is the name of many.” 

“As many, then, as have advanced in discipline and 
instruction, and been perfected [therein], have their lot 
among this ‘ many.’ 

“But they who have passed beyond these intro- 
ductory exercises, becoming natural Disciples of God, 
receiving wisdom free from all toil, migrate to this 
incorruptible and perfect Race, receiving a lot superior 
to their former lives in genesis.” } 

And that the mind is immortal may be shown alle- 
gorically from the death of Moses, who, says Philo, 
migrated “ by means of the Word (Logos) of the Cause,? 
by whom the whole cosmos was created.” 

This is said “in order that thou mayest learn that 
God regards the wise man as of equal honour with the 
cosmos ; for it is by means of the same Reason (Logos) 
that He hath made the universe, and bringeth back the 
perfect man from earthly things unto Himself again.” ® 

But enough of Philo for the moment. Sufficient has 
been given to let the reader hear the Alexandrian 
‘speak for himself on the central idea of his cosmos. 
Much else could be added—indeed, volumes could be 
written on the subject—for it gives us one of the most 
important backgrounds of Christian origins, and with- 
out a thorough knowledge of Hellenistic theology it is 
impossible in any way to get our values of many 
things correctly. 


1 De Sacrif., § 2; M. i. 164, P. 131 (Ri. i. 238). 
2 Deut. xxxiv. 5. A.V.: “According to the word of the Lord.” 
2 De Sacrif,, § 3; M.i. 165, P. 131 (Ri. i. 238). 


IX 


PLUTARCH: CONCERNING THE MYSTERIES 
OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 


FOREWORD 


In the chapter on Philo we attempted to set before the 
reader some outlines of the central doctrine of Hellen- 
istic theology—the sublime concept of the Logos— 
as envisaged by a learned Jew of the Diaspora, steeped 
in Hellenism, and living in the capital of Egypt and 
the centre of the intellectual life of Greater Greece. 

In the present chapter we shall endeavour to give the 
reader a further insight into this master-idea from 
another standpoint, and shall reproduce the views of a 
learned Greek, who, while remaining on the ground of 
Hellenic traditions proper, turns his eyes to Egypt, and 
reads what part of its mysterious message he can 
decipher, in Greek modes of thought. 

Plutarch, of Cheroneia in Beotia, flourished in the 
second half of the first century a.D., and so follows 
immediately on Philoand on Paul; like Philo, however, 
he knows nothing of the Christians, though like the 
Alexandrian he treats of precisely those problems and 
questions which were and are of pre-eminent interest 
for Christians. 

Plutarch chooses as his theme the myth and mysteries 
of Osiris and Isis. He gives the myth in its main 


outlines, and introduces us into the general religious 
255 


256 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


atmosphere of the Egyptian belief of what we may, 
perhaps, be allowed to call “ Demotic” times. But he 
does far more than this. Initiated himself into the 
Osiriaca, of which there was apparently a thiasos at 
Delphi, though on the one hand he possesses more 
knowledge of formal details than he feels himself per- 
mitted to disclose, on the other hand he is aware that 
the “ true initiate of Isis” is one who goes far beyond 
any formal reception of the symbolic mysteries; the 
true initiate must of his own initiative for ever keep 
searching and probing more deeply into the intimate 
reason of things, as adumbrated by the “things said 
and done” in the sacred rites (iii. 3). 

For this task Plutarch is well equipped, not only by 
his wide knowledge of the philosophy and theology and 
science of his day, but also by the fact that he held a 
high office at Delphi in the service of Apollo and also 
in connection with the Dionysiac rites. He was almost 
certainly a hierophant, and no merely formal one at 
that. 

Plutarch accordingly gives a most instructive ex- 
position, which should enable us, if only we are content 
to put ourselves in his place, and condescend to think 
in the terms of the thought of his day, to review the 
ancient struggle between physical reason and formal 
theology which was then in full conflict—a conflict 
that has been renewed on a vastly extended scale for 
the last few centuries, and which is still being fought 
to a finish or honourable truce in our own day. 

Our initiated philosopher is on the side neither of 
atheism or pure physicism, nor on that of superstition, 
as he understood those terms in his day; he takes a 
middle ground, and seeks final refuge in the fair vision 
of the Logos; and that, too, in all humility, for he 
knows well that whatever he can say is at best but a 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 257 


dim reflection of the glory of the Highest, as indeed he 
expressly tells us when writing: 

“Nor can the souls of men here on the earth, 
swathed as they are in bodies and enwrapped in 
passions, commune with God, except so far as they 
can reach some dim sort of a dream of Him with the 
perception of a mind trained in philosophy ” (Ixxiii. 2). 

We accordingly find Plutarch discussing the various 
theories of his day which professed to explain the 
mythological and theological enigmas of the ancients, 
with special reference to the Osiris myth. 

He discusses the theory of Evemerus, that the gods 
were nothing but ancient kings and worthies, and 
dismisses it as no really satisfactory explanation (xxiii.). 

He then proceeds to consider the theory that these 
things refer to the doings of daimones,—which he 
thinks a decided improvement on that of Evemerus 
(XxV.). 

Thence he passes to the theories of the Physicists 
or natural phenomenalists (xxxii.), and of the Mathe- 
matici—that is to say, the Pythagorean speculations as 
to the celestial spheres, and their harmonies (xli.). 

In each of these three latter theories he thinks there 
is some truth; still each by itself is insufficient; they 
must be combined (xlv.), and even then it is not enough. 

He next considers the question of first principles, 
and discusses the theories of the One, the Two, and 
the Many; again finding something to be said for each 
view, and yet adopting none of them as all-sufficient. 

But of all attempted interpretations he finds the 
least satisfactory to be that of those who are content 
to limit the hermeneutics of the mystery-myths simply 
to the operations of ploughing and sowing. With this 
“vegetation god” theory he has little patience, and 
stigmatises its professors as that “dull crowd” (Ixv.). 

VOL, I. 17 


258 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


And here, perhaps, some of us may think that Plutarch 
is not out of date even in the twentieth century of 
grace, and his arguments might be recommended to the 
consideration of those anthropologists who are just 
now with such complacency running to death what 
Mr Andrew Lang humourously calls the “Covent 

Garden” theory. . 
Further on, dealing as he does with the puzzling 
question of Egyptian “animal worship,” Plutarch is 
brought face to face with many problems of “ taboo” 
and “totemism,” and he is not without interest in what 
he says on these subjects (Ixxii. f.), and in the theories 
of utilitarianism and symbolism which he adduces 
(Ixxiv.). 

Finally, he gives us his view of the rationale of the 
custom of incense-burning (lxxix.), which should be 
of some concern to many in present-day Christian 
communities. 

But the whole of this complex of custom and rites, 
puzzling and self-contradictory as they may appear, 
and the whole of the riddles and veiled enigmas of 
Egyptian priestly tradition, are, Plutarch believes, 
resolvable into transparent simplicity by a proper 
understanding of the true nature of man and of his 
relation to Divine Nature, that Wisdom who is the 
eternal and inseparable spouse of Divine Reason, the 
Logos. 

It would perhaps have been simpler for some of my. 
readers—it certainly would have been shorter—had 
I condensed what Plutarch has to say; but my desire 
is rather to let this student of the comparative 
theology of his day speak for himself, and not to give 
my own views; for I still believe, in spite of the 
superior formal education of the twentieth century, 
that we cannot normally know more about the ancient 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 259 


mysteries and their inner purport than the best 
minds who were initiated into them while they still 
flourished. 

For not only are we without the precise data which 
these ancients possessed, but also the phase of thought 
through which we have recently been passing, and in 
which we mostly still are, is not one which can 
sympathetically tolerate those very considerations 
which, in my opinion, provide the most fertile ground 
of explanation of the true inwardness of what was 
best in those mystery-traditions, 

Moreover, I have thought it of service to give a full 
version of this treatise of Plutarch’s from a decent 
critical text,1 for the only translation in English read 
by me is by no means a careful piece of work,? and mani- 
festly rendered from a very imperfect text; also, the 
language of Plutarch in some passages appears to me 
to be deserving of more careful handling than has as 
yet been accorded it, for a number of sentences seem 
to have been purposely phrased so as to be capable 
of conveying a double meaning. 

Finally, with regard to his own interpretation, I 
would suggest that Plutarch, as was natural to a Greek, 
has more insisted on intellectual modes of thought than 
perhaps an Egyptian priest would have been inclined 
to do; for it seems probable that to the Egyptian mind 
the chief interest would lie in the possibility of the 
realisation of immediate contact with the Mystery in 
all those modes which are not so much intellectual as 

1 I use the texts of Parthey, Plutarch: Uber Isis und Osiris 
(Berlin, 1850), and of Bernardakis, Plutarcht Chaeronensis Moralia 
(“Bibliotheca Teubneriana” ; Leipzig, 1889), ii. 471 ff. 

2 See King (C. W.), Plutarch’s Morals: Theosophical Essays 
(London, 1889), pp. 1-71. 8S. Squire’s Plutarch’s Treatise of Isis 


and Osiris (Cambridge, 1744) I have not read, and few can pro- 
cure a copy nowadays. 


260 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


sensible; in other words, it would be by making himself 
a vehicle of the Great Breath in his body rather than 
a mirror of the Mystery in his mind, that the son of the 
Nile Land would seek for union. 

It is, moreover, of interest to find that Plutarch 
addresses his treatise to a lady. For though we have 
extant several moral tractates addressed to wives— 
such as Porphyry’s Letter to Marcella, and Plutarch’s 
Consolation to his own wife, Timoxena—it is rare to 
find philosophical treatises addressed to women, and 
nowadays many women are once more interested in 
such “ philosophy.” 

Plutarch wrote his essay at Delphi (Ixviii. 6), and 
addressed it to Klea, a lady who held a distinguished 
position among the Delphic priestesses, and who had 
herself been initiated into the Osiriac Mysteries—her 
very name Klea being, perhaps, her mystery-name 
(xxxv.). The treatise is, therefore, addressed to one 
who was prepared to read into it more than appears on 
the surface. 

It should also be remembered that in all probability 
the main source of Plutarch’s information was the now 
lost treatise of Manetho on the Egyptian Religion, and 
in this connection it is of interest to record Granger’s 
opinion, who, in referring to Plutarch’s De Iside et 
Osiride, says: 

“First he deals with those opinions which identify 
the Egyptian gods with natural objects—Osiris with 
the Nile, Isis with the land, and so on. Then he con- 
siders the interpretations of those who identify the gods 
‘with the sun and moon, etc. (ch. lxi.). These specula- 
tions summarise for us, at first or second hand, some of 
the Hermetic books current in Plutarch’s time.” 4 


1 Granger (F.), “The Poemander of Hermes Trismegistus,” 
Jour. Theol. Stud., vol. v. No. 19, p. 399. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 261 


CONCERNING ISIS AND OSIRIS 


ADDRESS TO KLEA CONCERNING GNOSIS AND THE 
SEARCH FOR TRUTH! 


I. 1.2 While all who have mind, O Klea, should ask 
for all their blessings from the Gods—let us, by pur- 
suing after them, pray to obtain from them those 
[blessings] of gnosis* concerning them, as far as ’tis 
within the reach of men; in that there’s nothing 
greater for a man to get, nor more majestic for a God 
to give, than Truth. 

2. Of other things their God gives men what they 
require, whereas of mind and wisdom He gives a’ share* 
to them—since He [Himself] possesses these and uses 
[them]. 

For the Divine is neither blest through silver and 
through gold, nor strong through thunderings and 
lightnings, but [blest and strong] by gnosis and by 
wisdom. 

3. And thus most finely of all things which he hath 
said about the Gods—sounding aloud: 


Yea have they both a common source and one [fair] native 
land ; 
But Zeus came into being first and he knew more— 


hath Homer made pronouncement of the primacy of 
Zeus as more majestic, in that in gnosis and in wisdom 
it® is older. 

4, Nay, I believe that the good fortune of xonian 
life—the which the God hath gotten for his lot—is 


1 T have added some sub-headings as an indication of contents, 
2 I have numbered the paragraphs for greater convenience of 
reference, 3 émorhuns, 
A play on dfdwow and pera-dldworw, 5 Sc. the primacy. 


262 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


that by reason of His gnosis the things in genesis 
shquld not entirely die; for when the knowing of 
existing things and being wise is taken from it, freedom 
from death is Time—not Life. 


THe ART OF KNOWING AND OF DIVINISING 


II. 1. Wherefore the longing for the Godly state is 
a desire for Truth, and specially the [truth] about the 
Gods, in so much as it doth embrace reception of the 
sacred [things]—instruction and research;1 a work 
more holy than is all and every purging rite and 
temple-service, and not least pleasing to that Goddess 
whom thou servest, in that she is particularly wise and 
wisdom-loving, seeing her very name doth seem to 
indicate that knowing and that gnosis? is more suitable 
to her than any other title. 

2. For that “Isis” is Greek,’ and [so is] “ Typhon ”— 
in that he’s foe unto the Goddess, and is “ puffed up” * 
through [his] unknowing and deceit, and tears the Holy 
Reason (Logos) into pieces and makes away with it; the 
which the Goddess gathers up again and recomposes, 
and transmits to those perfected in the art of divinis- 
ing,,—which-by the means of a continually sober life 


1 thy pdOnow... «al Carnow. Mathésis was the technical 
Pythagorean term fer gnosis. 

2 +d €ld-évar nal THY n-to-Thunv—word-plays on Tots. 

3 Of. lx. 2. The Egyptian of Isis is Ast. 

4 rervgwuévos—a play on rvddévy—lit., “wrapped in smoke 
(rdgos),” and because one so wrapped in smoke or clouds has his 
intelligence darkened, hence “puffed up with conceit,” crazy and 
demented. Typhén is the dark or hidden side of the Father. 

5 Geréoews (not in L, and 8. or Soph.); it presumably comes 
from the stem of @e:dw, which means : (i.) to smoke with sulphur 
and so purify ; (ii.) to make divine (@e7os), and so transmute into 
godship. The sentence may thus also mean “those initiated 
into the sulphur rite”’—a not impossible rendering when we 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 263 


and by [their] abstinence from many foods and sexual 
indulgences, tempers intemperate pleasure-love, and doth 
accustom [them] to undergo, without being broken down, 
the rigorous tasks of service in the sacred [rites], the 
end of which is gnosis of the First and Lordly One, the 
One whom mind alone can know, for whom the 
Goddess calls on [them] to seek, though He is by her 
side and one with her. 

3. Nay more, the very appellation of the holy [place] 
doth plainly promise gnosis, that is eidésis, of That- 
which-is ; for it is named Jseion, as though “of them 
who shall know”? That-which-is, if that with reason 
(logos) and with purity * we enter in the holy [places] of 
the Goddess. 


THe True INITIATES OF Isis 


III. 1. Yet many have set down that she is Hermes’ 
daughter, and many [that she is] Prometheus’s,— 
holding the latter as discoverer of wisdom and fore- 
knowledge, and Hermes of the art of letters and the 
Muses’ art. 


2. Wherefore, in Hermes-city, they call the foremost 
of the Muses Isis, as well as Righteousness,‘ in that she’s 


remember the Alchemical literature which had its source in 
Chemia-Egypt. It will also permit us to connect brimstone with 
Typhon—hoofs and all ! 

1 Or the Intelligible—vonroi. 

2 els-onévov rd bv—a play on ic-ei-ov—tfut. of »/Fid (vid) from 
which comes also efnois above. This may also mean “seeing” as 
well as “knowing,” and thus may refer to the Epopteia or Mystery 
of Sight, and not the preliminary Mystery of Hearing (Muésis). 

_ 8 éeles—another play on Tots ; ef. Ix. 3. 

4 Saootyny, or Justice (Maat), that is, the “power of the 
Judge,” Hermes being Judge of the Scales, The Nine are the Paut 
of Hermes, he being the tenth, the mystery being here read 
differently from the Ogdoad point of view—that is to say, macro- 
cosmically instead of cosmically. 


ee ge sta oS 


264 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


wise,! as has been said,? and shows® the mysteries of 
the Gods to those who are with truth and justice called 
the Carriers of the holy [symbols] and Wearers of the 
holy robes.‘ 

3. And these are they who carry the holy reason 
(logos) about the Gods, purged of all superstition and 
superfiluity, in their soul, as in a chest, and cast robes 
round it'—in secret disclosing such [things] of the 
opinion ® about the Gods as are black and shadowy, and 
such as are clear and bright, just as they are suggested 
by the [sacred] dress. 

4, Wherefore when the initiates of Isis at their 
“death” are adorned in these [robes], it is a symbol 
that this Reason (Zogos) is with them; and with Him 
and naught else they go there.” 

5. For it is not the growing beard and wearing cloak 
that makes philosophers, O Klea, nor clothing in linen 
and shaving oneself that makes initiates of Isis; but a 
true Isiac is one who, when he by law® receives them, 
searches out by reason (logos) the [mysteries] shown and 


1 Or, perhaps, the reading should be “ Wisdom.” 

3 Of. ii, 1. 

3 Seixvbovcay—probably a play on dicatordynv. 

4 fepopdpos Kad fepoorddors. Plutarch by his “with truth and 
justice” warns the reader against taking these words to mean 
simply the carriers of the sacred vessels and instruments in the 
public processions, and the sacristans or keepers of the sacred 
‘vestments. 

5 wepioréAdovres, which also means componere—that is, to lay 
out a corpse and so to bury. 

8 cifcews = ddens, appearance, seeming—that is, the public myth ; 
as opposed to Adyos=émorhun, knowledge or reality. 

7 Or “walk there”—that is, in “Hades.” Or, again, the 
“ death” is the death unto sin when they become Alive and walk 
among the “ dead” or ordinary men. 

8 That is, when the initiation is a lawful one, or really takes 
effect ; when a man’s karma permits it, that is, after passing the 
proper tests. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 265 


done concerning these Gods, and meditates upon the 
truth in them. 


Wuy THE PRIESTS ARE SHAVEN AND WEAR LINEN 


IV. 1. Now, as far as the “ many ” are concerned, even 
this commonest and smallest [secret] is hid from them, 
—namely, why the priests cut off their hair, and wear 
linen robes; for some do not at all care to know about 
these things, while others say that they abstain from 
[the use of] the sheep’s wool, as they do from its flesh, 
because they hold it sacred, and that they shave their 
heads through being in mourning, and wear linen things 
on account of the colour which the flax in flower sends 
forth, resembling the etherial radiance! that surrounds 
the cosmos. 

2. But the true cause, [the] one of all, is, as Plato says, 
[because]: “Itis not lawful for pure to touch not pure.” ? 

Now, superfluity* of nourishment and excretion is 
nothing chaste or pure; and it is from superfluities that 
wool and fur and hair and nails spring up and grow. 

3. It would, thus, be laughable for them to cut off 
their own hair in the purifications, shaving themselves, 
and making smooth their whole body evenly, and [then] 
put on and wear the [hair] of animals,‘ 

4, For indeed we should think that Hesiod, when he 
a Nor from five-branched at fire-blooming of Gods 

Cut dry from green with flashing blade 5— 


1 xpéav—also meaning surface, skin, and tone in melody. 

2 Phed., 67 B. 

3 wxepioowua—also probably here a play on that which is “ round 
the body” (wep! c@4a)—namely, the hair. 

4 @peupdrov—lit., “things nourished” (from tpé¢w), presum- 
ably a play on the “ nourishment” (rpo¢f) above. 

5 Op. et Dies, 741 f. This scrap of ancient gnomic wisdom 
Hesiod has preserved, I believe, from the “ Orphic” fragments 


266 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


teaches that [men] ought to keep holy day only when 
pure of such [superfluities], and not at the sacred 
operations themselves have need of purification and the 
removal of superfluities. 

5, Again, the flax grows out of the deathless earth, 
and yields a fruit that man may eat, and offers him a 
smooth pure raiment that does not weigh upon the 
watcher,! but is well joined for every hour,? and is the 
least cone - bearing,? as they say,— concerning which 
things there is another reason (logos). 


still in circulation in his day in Beeotia among the people from an 
Older Greece. I have endeavoured to translate it according to 
the most primitive meaning of the words. In later days it was 
thought that “five-branched” was the hand, and that the couplet 
referred to a prohibition against paring the nails at a feast of the 
Gods! In this sense also Plutarch partly uses it. But if I am 
right in my version, we have in the lines a link with that very 
early tradition in Greece which in later times was revived by the 
Later Platonic School, in a renewed contact with the ancient 
Chaldean mystery -tradition of the Fire. “Five - branched” 
would thus mean man, or rather purified man, and the saying 
referred to the “ pruning of this tree.” In it also we have an 
example of a “ Pythagorean symbol” three hundred years before 
Pythagoras. Finally, I would remind the reader of the Saying 
which the Master is said to have uttered as He passed to the Passion 
of the Crucifixion (Luke xxiii. 31): “ For if they do these things 
in the moist stock [A.V. green tree], what shall be done in 
the dry ?”—presumably the quotation of an old gnomic saying 
or mystery logos. The “moist nature” is the feminine side of the 
“ fiery” or “ dry.” 

1 Reading cxorodyr: for oxéxoy7:—that is, the soul. 

2 ebdpuooroy St mpds racav Spayv—“well adapted for every 
season” is the common translation; the “hour,” however, is a 
technical astrological term. 

3 Vulg., “lice-producing”—but $@efp also means a special kind 
of pine producing small cones; and the great cone was a symbol 
of the Logos, and the small cone of physical generation. It is 
also connected with $@cfpw, meaning to corrupt, and so to breed 
corruption, 


aa ee 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 267 


OF THE REFRAINING FROM FLESH AND SALT AND 
SUPERFLUITIES 


V. 1. And the priests handle so hardly! the nature 
of superfluities, that they not only deprecate the many 
kinds of pulse, and of meats the sheep-flesh? kinds 
and swine-flesh kinds, as making much superfluity, but 
also at their times of purification they remove the salts 
from the grains,? having other further reasons as well 
as the fact that it makes the more thirsty and more 
hungry sharpen their desire the more. 

2. For to argue that salts are not pure owing to the 
multitude of small lives* that are caught® and die in 
them when they solidify themselves, as Aristagoras 
said,® is naive. 

3. They are, moreover, said to water the Apis also 
from a special well, and by all means to keep him from 
the Nile——not that they think His’ water stained 
with blood because of the Crocodile,’ as some think 
(for nothing is so precious to Egyptians as the Nile), 


1 Vulg., “endure with such difficulty” or “feel such disgust 
at.” 

2 Referring usually to small animals of the sheep and goat 
kind, and more generally to all sacrificial animals. 

3 Or, perhaps, more generally, “the salt from their food.” It 
more probably refers to mineral and not to vegetable salts. 

4 That is animaleule. 

5 Gdtoxdueva—probably a word-play on aaas (salts). 

6 Miiller, ii. 99. Aristagoras was a Greek writer on Egypt, 
who flourished about the last quarter of the 4th century B.c. 

7 Namely the Nile, as Osiris, or the Great Deep. 

8 Mystically the “ Leviathan” (e.g. of the “ Ophites”) who lived 
in the Great Deep. Cf. also Ps. civ. 26, where, speaking of the 
Great Sea (25), it is written: ‘‘There go the ships [the barides, 
boats, or vehicles of souls], and there is that Leviathan [LXX. 
Dragon] whom thou hast fashioned to take his pastime [LXX. 
sport or mock] therein.” 


268 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


but that the water of Nile’s superfluity? on being 
drunk seems to make fat, nay, rather to make much 
too much of flesh. 

4, And [so] they do not wish the Apis to be so nor 
yet themselves, but [wish] to wear their bodies on 
their souls compact and light, and neither to com-press 
nor op-press them by the mortal part prevailing and its 
weighing down of the divine. 


ON THE DRINKING OF WINE 


VI. 1. And as for wine, the servants of the God in 
Sun-city? do not at all bring it into the sacred place, 
as ‘tis not right [for them] to drink by day while He, 
their Lord and King, looks on. 

2. The rest [of them °] use it indeed, but sparingly. 

They have, however, many times of abstinence at 
which they drink no wine, but spend them in the 
search for wisdom, learning and teaching the [truth] 
about the Gods. | 

3. The kings used to drink it, though in certain 
measure according to the sacred writings, as Hecateus 
has narrated,‘ for they were priests [as well]. 

4, They began to drink it, however, only from the 
time of Psammetichus ;° but before that they used not 
to drink wine. 

Nor did they make libation of it as a thing dear to 
the Gods, but as the blood of those who fought against 
the Gods,°—from whom, when they fell and mingled with 

1 7d NesAgov b5wp—ra Ne:Aga was the Feast of the Overflowing 
of the Nile. 

2 Heliopolis—the God being the “ Sun.” 

3 Sc. the priests. 

* Miiller, ii. 389. H. flourished last quarter of 6th and first 

5th century B.0o. 


5 Reigned 671-617 B.c. 
S$ Sc. the Titans or Daimones as opposed to the Gods. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 269 


the earth, they think the vines came, and that because 
of this wine-drenching makes men to be out of their 
minds and struck aside,| in that, forsooth, they are 
full-filled with the forefathers of its? blood.® 

5. These things, at any rate Eudoxus says, in Book II. 
of his Circwit,4 are thus stated by the priests. 


On Fiso Tasoos 


VII. 1. As to sea-fish, all [Egyptians] abstain gener- 
ally (not from all [fish] but) from some;—as, for 
example, those of the Oxyrhynchus nome from those 
caught with a hook, for as they venerate the sharp- 
snouted fish,> they fear that the hook ® is not pure when 
“sharp-snout” is caught by it;’ while those of the Syéné 
nome [abstain from] the “devourer,”® for that it seems 
that it appears together with the rising of the Nile, 
and that it shows their® growth to those in joy, seen 
as a self-sent messenger. 


1 Or “de-ranged”—raparAfjyas. Parapléx is the first of the 
daimonian rulers in The Books of the Saviour (Pistis Sophia, 367). 

2 Sc. the vine’s. 

8 Or “with the blood of its forefathers.” 

_ £ Or Orbit. Eudoxus flourished about the middle of the 4th 
century B.C. ; he was initiated into the Egyptian mysteries, and a 
great astronomer, obtaining his knowledge of the art from the 
priests of Isis, 

5 rby d&¢puyxov—perhaps the pike. 

8 %yxicrpov—dim. of &yxos, meaning a “bend” of any kind. 
Perhaps it may be intended as a play on the ankh tie or “noose 
of life,” the well-known Egyptian symbol, generally called the 
cruz ansata. 

7 If we read airG for air@ it would suggest a mystic meaning, 
namely, “falls into his own snare.” 

8 paypot—Vulg., sea-bream ; but Hesychius spells it ¢dywpos, 
connecting it with gayetv, to devour. 

9 Or “his” (the Nile’s); but the “self-sent messenger” 
(adrdyyeaos) seems to demand “their,” and so suggests a mystical 
sense, 


270 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


2. Their priests, upon the other hand, abstain from 
all; and [even] on the ninth of the first month, when 
every one of the rest of the Egyptians eats a broiled 
fish before his front door,? the priests do not taste it, 
but burn ¢heir fishes to ashes before the doors [of the 
Temple].® 

3. And they have two reasons [for this], of which I 
will later on take up the sacred and extraordinary [one], 
according with the facts religiously deduced concerning 
Osiris and Typhon. The evident, the one that’s close 
at hand, in showing forth the fish as a not necessary 
and a not unsuperfluous cooked food, bears witness 
unto Homer, who makes neither the Pheacians of 
luxurious lives, nor yet the Ithakésian Island men, use 
fish, nor yet Odysseus’s Companions‘ in so great a 
Voyage and on the Sea before they came to the last 
Strait.5 

4, And generally [the priests] think that the sea’s 
from fire and is beyond the boundaries—nor part nor 
element [of earth], but of another kind, a superfluity 
cor-rupted and cor-rupting. 


1 Copt. Thoth—corr. roughly with September. 

2 apd rijs addclov Odpas—that is, the outside door into the aia, 
or court of the house. Cf. the title of the Trismegistic treatise 
given by Zosimus—“ The Inner Door.” There may, perhaps, be 
some mystical connection. 

3 Of. Luke xxiv. 42: “And they gave Him a piece of broiled 
fish.” This was after His “resurrection.” Also cf. Talmud Bab., 
“ Sanhedrin,” 103a: “ That thou shalt not have a son or disciple 
who burns his food publicly, like Jeschu ha-Notzri” (D. J. L., 
189). 

4 Compare the Companions of Horus in the Solar Boat. 

5 I fancy there must be some under-meaning here, and so I 
have put the key-words in capitals, 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 271 


THE ONION AND Pic Taxsoos 


VIII. 1. For nothing reasonless, or [purely] fabulous, 
or from [mere] superstition, as some suppose, has been 
incorporated into the foundation of the sacred opera- 
tions, but some things have moral and needful causes, 
while others are not without a share in the embellish- 
ment of science and physics,—as, for instance, in the 
case of the onion. 

2. [The story] that Diktys, the nursling of Isis,” 
fell into the river and was drowned, in trying to catch 
the onions with his hands,’ [is] utterly incredible. 

3. The priests, however, keep themselves pure of the 
onion, and treat it hardly, being [ever] on the watch 
against it, because it is the only thing whose nature is to 
be well nourished and to flourish when the moon’s a-wane. 

It’s food * for neither fast nor feast,—neither for the 
former in that it makes those feeding® on it thirst, 
while for the latter it makes them weep. 

4, And in like manner also they consider the sow an 
unholy animal, because it seems to be covered especially 
when the moon is on the wane, while the bodies of 
those who drink its milk burst forth® into leprosy’ 
and scabrous roughnesses. 


1 Diktys=the Netter. In other myth-cycles Diktys was son 
of Poseidon, and is often called simply the Fisher. 

2 Of. xvi., xvii. 

3 éridpacoduevov. The Fisher-soul, therefore, presumably fell 
out of the celestial boat or baris of Isis, and the myth may not 
be quite so &r{éayoy as Plutarch would have us think. (Cf. xvii. 3. 
Ordinary onions do not grow in rivers. 

4 Or “ fit”—pdogopor. 

5 rods rporpepouevovs—a word-play on “ food.” 

6 étavOei—lit., “ flower.” 

7 dXexpav—that which makes the skin scaly and rough (Aempbds, 
as opposed to AeZos, smooth); there being also, I believe, a 
mystical under-meaning in it all, 


272 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


5. And the tale (logos) they tell after once only! 
sacrificing and eating pig at the full-moon—[namely] 
that Typhon when pursuing pig towards full-moon found 
the wooden coffin in which the body of Osiris lay dead, 
and scattered it in pieces*—they do not all receive, 
thinking it is a trifling mis-hearing [of the true tale] 
like many more? 

6. But they say their ancients so protected themselves 
against softness [of living] and extravagance and 
agreeable sensations, that they said a slab was set up in 
the holy place at Thebes with deprecations in-lettered 
on it against Meinis‘* the King, who first changed the 
Egyptians from the way of life without riches and 
without needs and plain. 

7. Moreover, Technactis, father of Bocchoris,' is said, 
when marching on the Arabs,® when his baggage was 
delayed,’ to have used with joy the food nearest at 
hand, and afterwards to have fallen into deep sleep on 
a bed of straw,’ and so embraced frugality; and in 


1 Apparently once a year. 

2 Cf. xviii. 1. 

8 This makes us doubt whether there may not be a number of 
similar “ mis-hearings ” in the myth as handed on by Plutarch. 

* Probably this should be Mved:s (Mnevis), the sacred black bull, 
venerated as the symbol of the ka of Ra, and so it may contain 
some mystical allusion. Cf. xxxiii. 5. 

5 réxvaxtis is, perhaps, a word-play on réx (A/rex, rlerw), 
“creative” or “generative,” and d«ris, “ray”; while Boxxdpis 
may also be a play—such as, if one is allowed to speculate wildly, 
Bois, “kine,” and xopds, “dance,” reflecting the celestial Bouxdacs 
or Cowherd. 

6 It is to be noticed that there was an Arab nome in Egypt, 
and that Egypt was mapped out into a mystic body ; and further, 
that the different surrounding nations were regarded as repre- 
sentative each of certain powers. 

7 Or it may mean “when his filth delayed him,” and so 
contain a mystical implication. 

8 én oriBddos. It may also mean “on the way.” 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 273 


consequence of this [he is said] to have execrated the 
Meinian, and, with the approval of the priests, to have 
graven his execration on stone. 


THE KINGS, THE RIDDLES OF THE PRIESTS, AND 
THE MEANING OF AMOUN 


IX, 1. The kings were appointed from the priests or 
from the warriors,—the one caste possessing worth and 
honour through manliness, and the other through 
wisdom. 

2, And he who was appointed from the warriors 
immediately became [one] of the priests and shared in 
their philosophy,—which for the most part was hidden 
in myths and words (Jogoi), containing dim reflections 
and transparencies of truth, as, doubtless, they them- 
selves make indirectly plain by fitly setting sphinxes 
up before the temples, as though their reasoning about 
the Gods possessed a wisdom wrapped in riddle. 

3. Indeed, the seat? of Athena (that is Isis, as they 
think) at Sais used to have the following inscription 
on it: 

“T am all that has been and is and shall be, and no 
mortal has ever re-vealed* my robe.” 4 

4, Moreover, while the majority think that the proper 
name of Zeus with the Egyptians is Amoun (which 
we by a slight change call Ammon), Manethé, the 
Sebennyte, considers it His hidden [one], and that His 
[power of] hiding is made plain by the very articulation 
of the sound. 

1 Of. M. L. ridellus, F. rideau, a curtain or veil. 

2 The technical term for the sitting statue of a god or goddess. 

3 amexddvev—that is, no one within duality has expressed or 
shown that in which 'this aspect of feminine life veils itself. 

4 For this mystical logos of Net (Neith), the Great Mother, cf. 
Budge, op. cit., i.°459 f. 

VOL. I. 18 


274 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


5. Hecateus! of Abdéra, however, says that the 
Egyptians use this word to one another also when they 
call one to them, for that its sound has got the power 
of “ calling to.” ? 

6. Wherefore when they call to the First God— 
who they think is the same for every man—as unto the 
Unmanifest and Hidden, invoking Him to make Him 
manifest and plain to them, they say “Amoun!” 

So great, then, was the care Egyptians took about 
the wisdom which concerned the mysteries of the Gods. 


Or THE GREEK DISCIPLES OF EGYPTIANS AND OF 
PYTHAGORAS AND HIS SYMBOLS 


X. 1. And the most wise of the Greeks also are 
witnesses—Solon, Thales, Plato, Eudoxus, Pythagoras, 
and, as some say, Lycurgus as well—through coming to 
Egypt and associating with her priests. 

2. And so they say that Eudoxus was hearer of 
Chonouphis* of Memphis, and Solon of Sonchis of Sais, 
and Pythagoras of (inuphis of Heliopolis. 

3. And the last especially, as it appears, being con- 
templated and contemplating,t brought back to the 


1 H. flourished 550-475 B.c. A. was a town on the southern 
shore of Thrace. 

2 mpoockAntixhvy. H. thus seems to suggest that it (? Amen) was 
a “word of power,” a word of magic for evoking the ka of a 
person, or summoning it to appear. It does not seem very 
probable that the Egyptians shouted it after one another in the 
street. 

3 That is, presumably, Knouph or Knef. 

4 Gavuaobels kal Oavudoas, passive and active of the verb of @aiyua, 
generally translated “wonder,” but meaning radically “look at 
with awe”; hence contemplate religiously (the art of @ewpta), and 
hence the Platonic (? Pythagorean) saying: “The beginning of 
philosophy is wonder.” Compare the variants of the new-found 
Jesus logos (“ Let not him who seeks,” etc.), which preserve both 
OauBnbels and Cavudeas. 


nA? 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 275 


memory of his men their! symbolic and mysterious 
[art], containing their dogmas in dark sayings. 

4, For most of the Pythagoric messages leave out 
nothing of what are called the hieroglyphic letters; 
for instance: “ Eat not on what bears two”;? “Sit not 
down on measure ”;? “ Plant not pheenix”;* “Stir not 
fire with knife ® in house.” 

5. And, for myself at least, I think that his men’s 
calling the monad Apollo,‘ and the dyad Artemis, and 
the hebdomad Athena, and the first cube’? Poseidon, 
also resembles those whose statues preside over the 
sacred places, and whose dramas are acted [there], 
yea and [the names] painted ® [there as well]. 


1 That is, to the men of Greece the art of the Egyptians. 

2 éml dldpov (=d:-¢dpov)—variously translated “off a chair,” 
“in a chariot,” hence “on a journey.” “That which bears two” 
is that which either carries two or brings forth two ; the logos is 
thus, perhaps, a warning against falling into duality of any kind, 
and hence an injunction to contemplate unity. 

3 The xoimgé was a dry measure, the standard of a man’s 
(slave’s) daily allowance of corn. Hence, perhaps, in one sense the 
symbol may mean: “Be not content with your ‘daily bread’ 
only”; yet any meaning connected with “that which measures” 
would suit the interpretation, such as, “Rest not on measure, 
but move in the unimmeasurable.” 

* poivé means a “ Phoenician” (as opposed to an Egyptian), a 
“date palm” (as opposed to a “pine”), and a “pheenix”; in 
colour this was “purple red,” “purple,” or “crimson.” The 
pheenix proper rose again from its ashes ; its colour was golden. 
gurvew means “ plant,” but also “ engender,” “ beget.” 

5 udxaipa was, in Homeric times, the technical term for the 
sacred sacrificial knife—the knife that kills and divides the 
victim’s body, while the fire transmutes and consumes it. There 
may, perhaps, be some connection between the symbol and the 
gnomic couplet of Hesiod quoted above (iv. 3); it is, however, 
generally said to mean, “Do not provoke an angry man,” but 
this leaves out of consideration the concluding words “ in house.” 

® Of. Ixxv. 14, 

7 Presumably the ogdoad or eight. 

§ Or “ written” or “ engraved.” 


276 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


6. For they write the King and Lord, Osiris, with 
“eye” and “sceptre.”* But some interpret the name 
also as “many-eyed,” since in the Egyptian tongue os 
means “many,” and i77 “eye.” 

7. And they write Heaven, as unageing through 
eternity? with “heart,” [that is] spirit, [rising] from 
“altar ”5 underneath. 

8. And at Thebes there used to be set up hand-less 
statues of judges, while the [statue] of the chief judge 
had its eyes tight shut,—seeing that Justice neither 
gives nor takes gift, and is not worked on. 

9. And for the warriors, “scarab” was their seal-em- 
blem ;—for the scarab is not female, but all [scarabs] 
are male,® and they engender their seed into matter [or 
material] which they make into spheres, preparing a 
field not so much of nourishment? as of genesis. 


ADVICE TO KLEA CONCERNING THE HIDDEN MEANING 
OF THE MYTHS 


XI. 1. When, therefore, thou hearest themyth-sayings 
of the Egyptians concerning the Gods—wanderings and 


1 Eg. Asar. 

2 Generally a “throne” in the hieroglyphs. But for the 
numerous variants, see Budge, Gods of the Egyptians, ii. 113. 
Of. li. 1 below. 

3 aid:drnra—lit., form-(or idea-) less-ness; transcending all 
forms. 

4 évudv, one of the most primitive terms of Greek psychology— 
spirit or soul, or more generally life-principle. 

5 éoxdpa, an altar for burnt offerings; here probably sym- 
bolising Earth as the syzygy of Heaven. 

6 It is to be remembered that the “ mark” of the warriors was 
their manliness (ix. 1), 

7 Matter (#An) being the Nurse, “according to Plato.” The 
legend was that the scarab beetle deposited its seed into dung 
which it first made into balls (lxxiv. 5). 


j 
4 
j 
i 
7 
. 
ig 
; 
A 
: 
= > 
1% 
i 
: 


ae eS oe Se a ee 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 277 


dismemberings, and many such passions'—thou shouldst 
remember what has been said above, and think none of 
these things spoken as they [really] are in state and 
action. 

2. For they do not call Hermes “Dog” as a proper 
name, but they associate the watching and waking 
from sleep of the animal,? who by knowing and not 
knowing determines friend from foe (as Plato says*), 
with the most Logos-like of the Gods. 

3. Nor do they think that the sun rises as a new-born 
babe from a lotus, but so they write “sun-rise,” riddling 
the re-kindling of the sun from moist [elements]. 

4. Moreover, they called the most crude and awe- 
some King of the Persians (Ochus)> — who killed 
many and finally cut the throat of Apis and made a 
hearty meal off him with his friends—‘Knife,”® and 
they call him so unto this day in the Catalogue’ of 
their kings,—not, of course, signifying his essence by 
its proper name,® but likening the hardness of his 
mood® to an instrument of slaughter. 


1 wa6huara—the technical mystery-term for such experiences, or 
sensible knowing. 

2 Or “of the Animal”—the Living One or Animal Itself or 
World Soul, if Dog is taken to mean the genus or Great Dog. 

3. Rep., li. 375 F. 

4 That is, the ideogram of a new-born child with its finger on 
its lips seated on the bosom of the lotus signified “sun-rise,” and 
“sun-rise” within as well as without. The “re-kindling” or 
“lighting up again” was presumably also a symbol of the “new 
birth from above.” ; 

5 Artaxerxes III.; the priests, however, presumably used 
this incident to illustrate some more general truth. A similar 
story is also related of Cambyses (xliv. 8); they also called 
Ochus “ Ass” (xxxi. 4). 

6 The sacrificial knife again, as in x. 2. 7 Of. xxxviii. 6, 

8 Perhaps even meaning by “ his name of power.” 

9 Or “of the turn,” where it might refer to the turn of 
Egypt’s fate-wheel. 


278 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


5. So too shalt thou, if thou hearest and receivest 
the [mysteries] about the Gods from those who interpret 
the myth purely and according to the love of wisdom, 
and if thou doest ever and keepest carefully the customs 
observed by the priests, and if thou thinkest that 
thou wilt offer neither sacrifice nor act more pleasing 
to the Gods than the holding a true view concerning 
them,—thou shalt escape an ill no less than being- 
without-the-gods,! [that is to say] the fearing-of-the- 
daimones.? 

XII. 1. The myth which is told is—in its very 
shortest possible [elements], after the purely useless 
and superfluous have been removed—as follows: 


THE MystEery-MytH 


2. They say that when Rhea? secretly united with 
Kronos, Helios on sensing‘ it imprecated her not to 
bring forth in month or year.® 

3. That Hermes being in love with the Goddess, 
came to conjunction [with her]; then playing draughts ® 
against Selene,’ and winning® the seventieth of each 


1 Or “atheism.” 

2 Generally rendered “superstition.” 

3 The Mother of the Gods—“ Flowing,” that is, motion pure 
and simple, unordered or chaotic. 

4 In the most primitive meaning of the word ailc@éuevov— 
from /ao, lengthened form of a (compare étw), 

5 wnvt unr’ eénavtg. Both words are connected with roots 
meaning “one,” in ancient dialects ; why=s-els (Mol.) and &os= 
an-nus (Lat.)’ Of. fs, ula, &; hence é-avrds=“ one-same.” 
The Goddess, therefore, apart from the Sun, could only bring forth 
in a day. 

6 rértia,—meoods was an oval-shaped stone for playing a game 
like our draughts ; it was also used for the board on which the 
game was played, divided by 5 straight lines each way, and 
therefore into 36 squares. 

7 Sc. the moon. 8 Or “ taking away.” 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 279 


of the lights, he con-duced from all! five days and 
in-duced them into the three hundred and sixty 
[days]|—which Egyptians call the “now in-duced,”? 
and keep as birthdays of the Gods.* 

4, [And they say] that on the first Osiris was born, 
and that a voice fell out* together with him on his 
being brought forth—to wit: “The Lord of all forth 
comes to light.” 

5. But some say that a certain Pamylé,* being 
moistened ® from the holy [place] of Zeus, heard a voice 
directing her to proclaim with outcry that “Great King 
Good-doing Osiris is born”; and that because of this 
she nursed Osiris, Kronos entrusting him to her, and 
they keep with mystic rites the Pamylia in his honour, 
similar to the Phallephoria.’ 

6. And on the second [they say] Arouéris [was born] 
—whom they call Apollo, and some call Elder Horus.’ 

On the third that Typhon, neither in season nor in 
place, but breaking through with a blow, leapt forth 
through her side.? 

On the fourth that Isis was born in all moist 
[conditions]. 

1 Sc. the lights. 2 éraryouévais—or “now intercalated.” 

3 This is an exceedingly puzzling statement. The “lights” 
cannot be the “lights” of the moon, of which there were 30 
phases. It more probably has some connection with 360, the 
70th of which works out at 5°142857—a number not so very far 
removed from our own calculations, The “each” in the text may 
thus be an error. 

* A voice from heaven, a Bath-kol, proceeding from the Womb 
of Rhea. 

5 wautAn—presumably a play on way (all) and #An (matter). 

8 S5pevouévny—presumably by the Great Moistener ; it is, how- 
ever, generally translated “drawing water.” 

7 That is the “ Phallus-Bearing.” 8 Eg. Heru-ur. 

® wAcipa—meaning in man radically “rib”; also side of a 
square, and root of a square (or cubic)number. Typhon would be 
represented by the diagonal. 


280 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


On the fifth Nephthys, whom they name End and 
Aphrodité, while some [call] her also Victory. 

7. And [they say] that Osiris and Arouéris were from 
Helios, Isis from Hermes, and Typhon and Nephthys 
from Kronos, and therefore the kings considering the 
third! of the “induced” [days] nefast, used neither 
to consult nor serve themselves till night.? 

8. And [they say] that Nephthys was married to 
Typhon ;* but Isis and Osiris being in love with each 
other, united even before they were born, down in the 
Womb beneath the Darkness.‘ 

9. Some, moreover, say that Arouéris thus came to 
birth, and that he is called Elder Horus by Egyptians, 
but Apollo by Greeks. 

XIII. 1. And [they say] that. when Osiris was king, 
he straightway set free the Egyptians from a life from 
which they could find no way out and like unto that of 
wild beasts,> both setting fruits before them, and laying 
down laws, and teaching them to honour the Gods. 

2. And that subsequently he went over the whole 
earth, clearing it,° not in the least requiring arms, 
but drawing the multitude to himself by charming 
them with persuasion and reason (Jogos),’ with song 
and every art the Muses give;® and that for this 


1 That is, the birthday of Typhon. 

2 A strange sentence; but as the kings were considered Gods, 
they probably worshipped themselves, or at least their own ka, 
and consulted themselves as oracles. 

3 Presumably as being opposite, or as hating one another. 

4 Of. liv. 4. 

5 Metaphors reminiscent of the symbolism of the so-called Book 
of the Dead. 

8 Sc, of wild beasts ; but may also mean “softening it,” when 
Osiris stands for Water, and again “making it mild,” or 
“ civilising it.” 7 He himself being the Logos. 

§ povoixijs—music, in the modern meaning of the term, was only 
one of the arts of the Muses, the nine daughters of Zeus. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 281 


cause he seems to the Greeks to be the same as 
Dionysus.! 

3. And [they say] that while he was away, Typhon 
attempted no revolution, owing to Isis keeping very 
careful guard, and having the power? in her hands, 
holding it fast; but that when he [Osiris] came back, 
he made with art a wile for him, con-juring seventy-two 
men, and having as co-worker a queen coming out of 
Ethiopia, whom they call Asé.* 

4, But that after measuring out for himself in secret 
the body of Osiris,t and having devised, according to 
the size,> a beautiful and extraordinarily ornamented 
chest,® brought it into the banqueting hall.’ 


1 Atd-yvcos—that is, “he of the Mount (vica) of Zeus.” 

2 That is “sovereignty.” 

3 Probably the prototype of the Alchemical Azoth. thiopia 
was the land of the black folk south of Egypt, the land par excellence 
of the black magicians as opposed to the good ones of the Egyptians 
(this, of course, being the Egyptian point of view). The Osiris-myth 
wasin Egyptian, presumably, aseasily interpretableintothe language 
of magic and con-juration as into other values. Compare the Demotic 
folk-tales of Khamuas, in Griffith’s Stories of the High Priests of 
Memphis, for how this view of it would readin Egyptian. Aithiopia 
would also mean the Dark Earth as opposed to the Light Heaven. 

4 The “body of Osiris” may mean the cosmos (great or little), 
as the “body of Adam,” its copy in the Kabalah., 

5 Or, “according to the greatness”—using “ greatness” in its 
Gnostic signification, as here meaning the great cosmos and also 
the cosmic body of man, 

6 In Pythagorean terms, “ an odd-ly ordered rectangular encase- 
ment”—referring, perhaps, to a certain configuration of cosmic 
permanent atoms. But see the plate which Isaac Myer calls “A 
Medieval Idea of the Makrokosm, in the Heavenly Zodiacal Ark,” 
but which intitles itself “Forma Exterior Arce Noé ex Descriptione 
Mosis.” This is a coffin, and within it lies the dead Christ. The 
plate is prefixed to p. 489 of Myer’s Qabbalah (Philadelphia, 1888). 
It also presumably refers to the “germ” of the cosmic robe of the 
purified man, the “robe of glory.” In mysticism the metaphors 
cannot be kept unmixed, for it is the apotheosis of syncretism. 

7 Lit., the “drinking together,” referring perhaps to the con- 


282 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


5. And that when they were delighted at the sight 
and wondered, Typhon, in sport, promised to give the 
chest to him who could make himself exactly equal 
to it by laying himself down in it. 

6. And that when all were trying, one after another, 
since no one fitted, Osiris stepped in and laid himself 
down. 

7. And they who were present running up, dashed 
on the lid, and, after some [of them] had closed it down 
with fastenings, and others had poured hot lead over it, 
they carried it out to the River,? and let it go into the 
Sea by way of the Tanitic* mouth, which [they say] 
Egyptians call even to this day by a hateful and 
abominable name. 

8. These things they say were done on the seven- 
teenth of the month Athur,s in which [month] the 
Sun passes through the Scorpion; it being the eight- 
and-twentieth year of Osiris’ reign. 

9. Some, however, say that he had lived and not 
reigned so long.® 

XIV. 1. And as the Pans and Satyrs® that in- 
habit round Chemmis’ were the first to sense the 
junction of certain cosmic forces, and also microcosmically to souls 
in a state of joy or festivity or bliss, prior to incarnation. 

' That is, prove the “ permanent atoms” were his own—if we 
think in terms of reincarnation. 

2 Sc. the Sacred Nile, Great Jordan, etc., the Stream of Ocean, 
which, flowing downwards, is the birth of men, and upwards, the 
birth of Gods. 

3 zay-ittxod—probably a word-play connected with »/ray, “to 
stretch,” and so make tense or thin, or expand, and so the “ wide- 
stretched mouth of the Great River.” Cf. the Titans or Stretchers. 

4 Copt. Hathér—corr. roughly to November. 

5 Of. xlii. 4. 

6 Two classes of elemental existences. 

7 That is Apu, the Panopolis of the Greeks ; the name Chemmis, 
the modern Akhmim, is derived from an old Egyptian name. 
See Budge, op. cit., ii. 188. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 283 


passion ! [of Osiris], and give tongue concerning what 
was being done, [they say] that on this account sudden 
disturbances and emotions of crowds are even unto 
this day called “ panics.” 

2. But when Isis? sensed it, she cut off one of her 
curls, and put on a mourning dress, whence the city to 
this day bears the name Kopto.’ 

But: others think the name signifies privation,* for 
they say that koptein is to de-prive. 

3. And [they say] that she, wandering about in 
every direction, and finding no way out, never ap- 
proached any one without accosting him; nay, she 
asked even little children whom she happened to meet, 
about the chest. 

4. And they happened to have seen, and showed the 
mouth * through which the friends of Typhon let the 
vessel ® go into the Sea. 

5. Because of this [they say] Egyptians believe that 
little children have prophetic power, and they especially 
divine from the sounds of their voices, when playing 
in the holy places and shouting about anything. 

6.7 And [they say] that when [Isis] was aware that 


1 wdé@0s—the technical term of what was enacted in the 
mystery-drama. 

2 As Mother Nature. 

3 Meaning “I cut” ; and in mid. “I cut or beat the breast,” as 
a sign of mourning. 

4 “The depriving things of their power” or “negation” ; 
Osiris being the fertilising or generative or positive power. 

5 Sc. the way or passage. In little children the life force is not 
sexually polarised. 

6 ayyetov—a vase or vessel of any kind, hence funerary urn or 
even coffin ; but uerayyifew means “to pour from one vessel into 
another,” and wetrayyicuds is the Pythagorean technical term for 
metempsychosis or palingenesis. 

7 This paragraph, which breaks the narrative, is introduced to 
give the myth of the birth of Anubis. 


284 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Osiris in ignorance had fallen in love and united him- 
self with her sister! as with herself, and seeing as proof 
the honey-clover? wreath which he had left behind 
with Nephthys, she sought for the babe—(for she [N.] 
exposed it immediately she bore it, through fear of 
Typhon *). | 

7. And after it was found with toil and trouble— 
dogs‘ guiding Isis to it—it was reared and became her 
guard and follower, being called Anubis, and is said to 
guard the Gods, as their dogs men. 

XV. 1. It was from him she got intelligence about 
the chest :—that after it had been wave-tossed out by 
the Sea to the Byblos® country, the land-wash had 
gently brought it to rest in a certain heather-bush.” 6 

2. And the heather-bush, in a short time running up 
into a most beautiful and very large young tree, en- 
folded, and grew round it,’ and hid it entirely within 


itself. 
3. And the King,§ marvelling at the greatness of the 


1 Sc, Nephthys. 

2 Meli-lote—lotos in Greek stands for several plants ; it might 
be translated as “ honey-lotus.” Of. xxxvilii. 5. 

3 Her legitimate spouse. 

4 A term used frequently among the Greeks (who presumably 
got the idea elsewhere) for the servants, agents, or watchers of 
the higher Gods ; thus the Eagle is called the “winged dog” 
of Zeus (Aisch., Pr., 1022). “Dog,” as we have seen (xi. 1, n.) 
signifies a power of the World, Soul or Great Animal, also of 
individual souls. 

5 That is, “Papyrus.” This Byblos was a “city in the Papyrus 
Swamps of the Delta.” (So Budge, op. cit., ii. 190.) 

8 épefxn—probably a play on the root-meaning of épelxew, “to 
quiver,” is intended. The Egyptian erica was taller and more 
bushy than ours. Or it may be the tamarisk; elsewhere it is 
called a mulberry-tree. 

7 Sc. the “coffin” — perhaps here signifying what has lately 
been called the “ permanent atom” in man. 

8 The ruler of the form-side of things. | 


a 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 285 


tree, after cutting off the branches, and rounding off 
the trunk that surrounded the coffin without its being 
seen,! set it up as the prop of his roof. 

4, And they say that on her hearing of these things 
by the daimonian spirit of a voice,? Isis came to Byblos, 
and, sitting down at a fountain-head, downcast and 
weeping, held converse with no one else, but she 
embraced and showed affection to the maids of the 
Queen, curling * their hair and exhaling from herself on 
their skin a marvellous fragrance. 

5. And when the Queen saw her maids, longing for 
the ambrosia-smelling hair and skin of the stranger 
came upon her. 

And so when she had been sent for and had become 
an inmate [of the palace, the Queen] made her nurse of 
her little one. 

6. And the name of the King, they say, was 
Malkander,* while her name according to some was 
Astarte, according to others Sadsis, and according to 
others Nemanous,>—or whatever is the name for which 
the Greek equivalent would be Athenais.® 


1 On the erroneously called “Gnostic” gems, the lopped trunk 
is a frequent symbol ; the lopped “ five-branched,” presumably. 

2 Notice the three stages of awareness: (i.) the babbling of 
children ; (ii.) the intelligence given by the dog; (iii.) the 
daimonian spirit of a voice (Heb. Bath-kol). 

3 Isis, when she first lost Osiris, cut off a curl (xiv. 2). 

4 Apparently, though curiously, a play on the Semitic MLK or 
Malek, “king,” and the Greek andr, “man”—that is, “king of 
men,” 

5 Or “Nemanés.” The names seem to have been impartially 
maltreated by the copyists ; thus we find such variants as Asparté, 
Sooses, Neimanoé. 

® There was among the ancients an art of name-translation, as 
Plato tells usin the Story of Atlantis, in which the Atlantic names, 
he says, were translated into Greek by Solon or by the priests of 
Sais. Here, I believe, there isalso a word-play intended. Isis, as 
we have seen, was pre-eminently Nurse, rirén, a further intensifica- 


286 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


XVI. 1. And [they say] that instead of giving it? the 
breast, Isis reared the little one by putting her finger? 
into its mouth, and that at night she burnt round * the 
mortal [elements] of its body, and, turning herself into 
a swallow, flew round the pillar and twittered a dirge; 
until the Queen, through spying [on her] and cry- 
ing out* when she saw the babe being burnt round, 
deprived it of its immortality.® 

2. That when the Goddess revealed herself, she 
claimed for herself the pillar of the roof; and, taking 
it down with the greatest care, she cut away the heather- 
tree from round it, then wrapping this ® up in fine linen, 
and pouring the juices of sweet herbs over it,’ she placed 
it in the hands of the royal couple ; and even unto this 
day the people of Byblos venerate the wood® lying in 
the holy place of Isis. 


tion of the intensified rf-@n from »/éa, “suckle” ; the common form 
of “nurse” was r:-64-vn, On the contrary, 4@nvats is a daughter or 
derivative of 4-64-vn, one who does not give suck ; for Athena was 
born from the head and was the virgin goddess par excellence, 
Mythologically, Athenais was wife of Alalkomeneus, the epony- 
mous hero of a city in Bootia, where was a very ancient temple of 
Athena. In the Pindaric ode quoted in §. (1) of chapter, “Myth 
of Man in the Mysteries,” Alalkomeneus is given as one of the 
equivalents for the “first man.” 

1 The child’s name was Diktys, according to viii. 2. 

2 The «/Sex in ddervdAos is said to be the same as that in déka, 
“ten,” and “ten” is the number of “ perfection.” 

3 Or “away.” 

4 Lit., “croaking” like a raven, to match the “twittering” of 
the swallow. 

5 This presumably hints that Isis, as the Divine Mother, 
endeavours to make all perfect and sound, while the earthly 
mother prevents this. 

8 Se. the erica. : 

7 Cf. John xix. 40: “So they took the body of Jesus and 
wrapped it in fine linen together with sweet herbs.” 

8 +d tvAov—the term used repeatedly in the New Testament 
for the cross. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 287 


3. As for the coffin, she flung herself round it, and 
kept moaning so long, that the younger of the little ones 
of the king died away ;! and, taking the elder with her- 
self, and placing the coffin on a boat, she sailed away. 

4, And when the River Phedrus? raised too rough a 
wind ® just after dawn,* waxing wrath, she dried up his 
stream. 

XVII. 1. And [they say] that when first she found soli- 
tude and was by herself, she opened the chest, and laying 
her face on his face, she kissed [him] and shed tears, 

2. And that when the little one came up in silence 
from behind and understood, on sensing it she turned 
herself about, and passionately gave him an awe-ful 
look. And the little one could not hold himself up 
against the awe of her, and died. 

3. But some say [it was] not thus, but, as it has been 
said before, that he fell out ® into the river. 

4, And he has honours owing to the Goddess, for the 
Manerés’ whom Egyptians hymn at their symposia is he. 

5. While others relate that the boy was called 
Palestinos® or Pelousios, and that the city® was 
named after him when it was founded by the Goddess ; 
and that the Maneréds who is hymned was the first to 
discover the art of the Muses,” 


1 Or “swooned,” or lost consciousness. 

2 ¢ddpos—lit., Bright, Beaming, Shining—that is, the Sun- 
stream. 

3 Or “ breath” (xvetpa). * That is “at sun-rise,” 

5 Cf. viii. 2. 8 Sc. of the boat of Isis. 

7 May-épws. I fancy this is a play, in conjunction with the 
kata-pav-Ody-ovra and &mwo-@dv-ovra (the “understanding” and 
“dying away”) above; the name would then mean either “love 
of understanding” or “‘ understanding of love.” 

8 wadkaorwés—perhaps a play on madaorfs, “a wrestler” ; 
hence a “rival” or “suitor.” 

® Pelusium ; the Pelusian was the eastern mouth of the Nile. 

10 See note on xxi. 1. 


288 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


6. But some say that it is the name of no one, but a 
manner of speech for men drinking and feasting,—with 
the meaning “ May such and such things be present in 
becoming measure!” For the Egyptians on every 
such occasion shout out this, it being indicated to them 
by “ Manerds.” 

7. Just as, doubtless, also their being shown the 
image of a dead man carried round in a small wooden 
coffin, is not a reminder of the Osirian passion, as 
some suppose ; but it is in order to exhort them while 
filled with wine to make use of things present, in that 
all will very presently be such [as it], that they bring 
in an unpleasing after-revel. 

XVIII. 1. And [they say] that when Isis had gone a 
journey to her son Horus, who was being reared at 
Boutos,! and had put away ? the chest, Typhon, taking 
his dogs * out by night towards the moon, came upon it ; 
and recognising the body, tore it into fourteen pieces, 
and scattered them abroad. 

2. And Isis [they say] on learning this, searched for 
them in a papyrus skiff (baris) sailing away through the 
marshes;° whence those who sail in papyrus hulls are 
not injured by the crocodiles, either because they ® fear 
or rather revere the Goddess.’ 


1 Generally supposed to stand for the city Butd, but may be 
some word-play. Can it be connected with Bootes, the Plough- 
man—the constellation Arcturus—the voyage being celestial ; 
that is, a movement of the world-soul or change of state in the 
individual soul? Budge (p. 192) gives its Egyptian equivalent as 
Per-Uatchit, ze. “ House of the Eye.” 

2 Lit., from her feet. 

3 Lit., vessel ; may also mean “ cell.” 

* Vulg., “hunting.” 

5 €\n—a probable play on the d:-eAciy (“tear to pieces ”) above. 

6 Sc. the crocodiles, 

7 It is remarkable how that every now and then Plutarch in- 
serts apparently the most naive superstitions without a word of 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 289 


3. And it is because of this [they say] that many 
tombs of Osiris are spoken of in Egypt'—through her 
performing burial rites on meeting with each piece. 

4, Some, however, say no; but that making herself 
images [of them] she distributed these to each city,” as 
though she were giving it the [whole] body, in order 
that it might have honours from the multitude, and 
that even if Typhon should get the better of Horus, 
he might renounce his search for the true tomb when 
many were spoken of and pointed out. 

5. Now, the only one of the parts of Osiris which 
Isis did not find was that which causes awe; for that 
it was cast straightway into the River, and the scaly- 
coat,? and the devourer,* and the sharp-snout® ate it 
up—which [they say] among fishes are considered 
specially expiate;® and that Isis, making herself a 
counterfeit instead of it, consecrated the phallus; in 
honour of which the Egyptians keep festival even to 
this day.’ 

XIX. 1. Thereafter Osiris, coming to Horus out of 
explanation, They cannot be all simply irresponsible on dits. 
It is, perhaps, not without significance that the “chest” is first of 
all drifted to the Papyrus country, and that the baris of Isis 
should be made of papyrus. It seems almost as if it symbolised 
some “ vehicle” that was safe from the “crocodile” of the deep. 
In other words, the skiffs are not paper boats and the crocodiles 
not alligators. 

1“And Egypt they say is the body”—to quote a refrain 
from Hippolytus concerning the “ Gnostics,” 

2 Presumably of the fourteen sacred ones, 

3 Aemdwrdv. £ pdypoy, 5 agdpuyxoyr. 

6 Anthropologically, “ taboo,” 

7 What these “fourteen parts” of Osiris may be is beyond the 
sphere of dogmatism. I would suggest that there may be along one 
line some connection with those seeds of life which have lately 
been called “permanent atoms”; and along another, line, that 
of the birth of the Christ-consciousness, there may be a series of 
powers derived from past incarnations. 


VOL. I. 19 


290 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


the Invisible,1 worked through him and trained him for 
the fight. 

2. He then put this test question to him: “What 
does he consider fairest ?” And when he said: “ Help- 
ing father and mother in ill plight,’—he asked a 
second: “ What animal does he think most useful for 
those who go out to fight ?” 

3. And when Horus said “Horse,” he marvelled 
at him, and was quite puzzled why he did not say 
“Lion” rather than “ Horse,” ? 

4, Accordingly Horus said: “‘Lion’ is a needful 
thing to one requiring help, but ‘ Horse’ [ean] scatter in 
pieces the foe in flight and consume him utterly.” ® 

Thus hearing, Osiris rejoiced that Horus was fitly 
prepared. 

5, And it is said that as many were changing over 
to the side of Horus, Thiéris,s* Typhon’s concubine, 
came too; and that a certain serpent pursuing after 
her was cut in pieces by those round Horus5 And 
to-day on this account they cast down a small rope and 
cut it in pieces for all to see.® 

6. The fight lasted for many days, and Horus won. 
Nevertheless, when Isis received Typhon in bonds, she 
did not make away with him. Far from it; she 
unbound him and let him go. 

1 Hades, 

2 The “ Horse” may symbolise purified passion, and “Lion” a 
certain receptive power of the mind. 

3 The white “ Horse” was presumably opposed to the red “ Ass” 
of Typhon, as the purified vehicle of the soul contrasted with the 
impure. ‘“ Lion” was one of the grades in the Mithriac Mysteries ; 
it was a sun-animal. 

4 Eg. Ta-urt (Budge, op. cit., p. 193). 

5 That is, by the Companions of Horus (or Disciples of the 
Christ)—a frequent scene in the vignettes of the Book of the 
Dead. 

6 That is, in the public mystery processions. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 291 


7. Horus, however, did not bear this temperately ; 
but, laying hands on his mother, he drew off the crown 
from her head. Whereupon Hermes! crowned her 
with a head-dress of cow-horns. 

8, And [they say] that also when Typhon got the 
chance of bringing a bastardy suit against Horus, and 
Hermes was counsel for the defence, Horus was judged 
legitimate by the Gods.” 

And that [afterwards] Typhon was fought under in 
two other fights. 

9. And that Isis brought forth from her union with 
Osiris after his death * Harpocrates*—who missed the 
month and was weak in his limbs from below upwards.® 


Tut UNDER-MEANING A REFLEXION OF A 
CERTAIN REASON 


XX. 1. These are approximately the chief headings of 
their myth, after the most ill-omened have been removed, 
—such as, for instance, the one about the cutting up 
into pieces of Horus, and the beheading of Isis. 

2. That, however, if people suppose and say these. 
things about that Blessed and Incorruptible Nature 
according to which especially the Divine conceives 
itself, as though they were actually enacted and really 
took place, “ thou shouldst spit out and cleanse mouth,” 
according to A‘schylus,® there is no need to tell thee;? 
for of thyself thou showest displeasure at those who 
hold illegitimate and barbarous notions about the Gods. 


1 The symboliser as well as the interpreter of the Gods. 

2 Of. liv. 3. 

3 Or it may mean “completion” (reAcurfv). 

4 In Eg. Heru-p-khart, 2.¢., “ Horus the Younger.” 

5 rois xdrw0ev yvtois—but, presumably, not from above down- 
wards, 

6 Ed. Nauck, p. 84. 7 Sc. Klea. 


292 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


3. But that these things are not at all like lean tales 
and quite empty figments, such as poets and prose- 
writers weave and expand as though they were spiders 
spinning them out of themselves from a source that has 
no basis in fact, but that they contain certain informa- 
tions and statements,—thou knowest of thyself. 

4, And just as the Mathematici! say that “Iris”? 
is the sun’s reflexion many-coloured by the return of its 
visual impression to the cloud, so the myth down here 
is a reflexion of a certain reason (logos) that bends its 
thinking back on other things; as both the sacred 
offerings suggest by the reflected element of mournful- 
ness and sadness they contain, and also the dispositions 
of the temples which in one direction open out into 
side-walks and courts for moving about in, open to the 
sky and clear of objects, while in the other they have 
hidden and dark robing-rooms under ground, like places 
for putting coffins in and burying-spots. 


CONCERNING THE TomBs OF OSIRIS 


5. And not least of all does the belief of the Osirians 
—since the body [of Osiris] is said to be in many places 
—[suggest this]. 

6. For they say that both Diochité is called Polichné,® 
because it alone has the true one; and [also] that it 
is at Abydos that the wealthy and powerful of the 
Egyptians are mostly buried,—their ambition being to 
have a common place of burial with the body of Osiris ; 
and [again] that it is at Memphis that the Apis is 

1 Presumably, again, the Pythagorean grade above the Hearers. 

2 Sc. the rainbow. 

3 Either the reading is at fault, or some word-play is intended. 
Dio-chité is probably Zeus-something ; but I cannot resolve it. 


While Polichné is a rare diminutive of wéats, and would thus 
mean “ Little City.” 


ee en ee 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 293 


reared as the image of the soul of Osiris, because it is 
there also that his body lies. 

7. And as for the City,! some interpret it as “ Harbour 
of Good Things,” but others give it the special meaning 
of “ Tomb of Osiris” ; it is, however, the little island one? 
at Phile [they say] which is in other respects inaccessible 
and inapproachable by all, and that not even the birds 
light on it or fish come near it, but at a certain season 
the priests cross over [to it] and make offerings to the 
dead, and place wreaths on the monument which is 
overshadowed by a. . .® tree, which is greater in size 
than any olive. 

XXI. 1. Eudoxus, however, [says] that, though many 
tombs are spoken of in Egypt, the body lies at Bisiris, 
for that this had been the native city of Osiris ; never- 
theless Taphosiris requires no further reason [to 
establish its claim], for the name explains itself— 
namely, “ Burying of Osiris.” 

“But I rede of cutting of wood, of rending of linen, 
and pouring of pourings, because many of the mystery- 
[meanings] have been mixed up with them.” * 

1 ?Memphis ; or, perhaps, as contrasted with the Little City above. 

“2 Sc. city ; vorirdyny is a hopeless reading, and as the editors 
can make nothing out of it, I suggest vnolrida or vnoiddyny (wdrur). 

3 wnOidns—apparently an error; Bernardakis suggests pivéns 
(Lat. mentha), “ mint.” Can the right reading be pundiijs (wdas) ? 
The herba medica was, however, the sainfoin or lucerne, which, 
though reminding us of the melilote of xiv., is hardly capable of 
overshadowing a tomb even in the most intricate symbolical sense. 

* Evidently a verbal quotation from Eudoxus. The “cutting 
of wood” presumably refers to the trunk with lopped branches, 
which, as we have already mentioned, occurs so frequently on so- 
called “Gnostic” gems ; the “ rending of linen” (Afvov) might also 
be made to refer to Linus, the Bard, and his being torn to pieces 
like Osiris ; Linos also means the “Song of Linus,” so called, it is 
supposed by some, because in earliest times the strings of the 


cithara were made of flax. For other names of singers used for 
lays or modes of song, compare Manerés and Pean ; though, of 


294 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


2. But the priests say that not only of these Gods, 
but also of all the other gods also who are not ingener- 
able and indestructible, the bodies lie buried with them 
when they? have done their work, and have service 
rendered them, while their souls shine in heaven as 


course, the modern way is to regard the singer as the personifica- 
tion of the lay. Thus in Emil Naumann’s History of Music 
(trans. by F. Praeger; London, 1882), p. 3, we read: “The 
Greek tribes of Peloponnesus and Hellas, as well as the Egyptians, 
Pheenicians, the Greeks inhabiting the isles of the Aigean Sea, 
and especially those of Cyprus, had a primitive ‘Lament’ which 
seems to have come originally from Phoenicia. It was a funeral. 
chant on the death of the youthful Adonis. . . . The Egyptians 
changed its signification into a lament of Isis for Osiris. The 
Greeks called it Linos, and the Egyptians Maneros.” The 
beginning of the “Maneros,” or the Lament of Isis for her 
Beloved, is given as follows by Naumann (p. 40): 


“Return, oh, return ! 
God Panu, return ! 
Those that were enemies are no more here. 
Oh lovely helper, return, 
That thou may’st see me, thy sister, 
Who loves thee. 
And com’st thou not near me ? 
O beautiful youth, return, oh, return ! 
When I see thee not 
My heart sorrows for thee, 
My eyes ever seek thee, 
I roam about for thee, to see thee in the form of the Nai, 
To see thee, to see thee, thou beautiful lov’d one. 
Let me the Radiant, see thee 
God Panu, All-Glory, see thee again ! 
To thy belovéd come, blessed Onndfris, 
Come to thy sister, come to thy wife, 
God Urtuhet, oh, come! 
Come to thy consort !” 


Unfortunately, Naumann does not give any references by 
which we can control his statements. 

1 The bodies ; presumably referring to the mummies of those 
men and women who were believed to have reached the god-stage 
while living. 


sel a > 


ee 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 295 


stars; and that [of the former] the [soul] of Isis is 
called Dog by the Greeks, but Sdthis by the Egyptians, 
while the [soul] of Horus [is called] Oridn, and Typhon’s 
Bear.” 

3. And [they say] that for the burials of the animals 
to whom honour is paid, the rest [of the Egyptians] 
pay the [dues which are] mutually determined; but 
that those alone who inhabit the Thebaid give nothing, 
since they believe that no God is subject to death, and 
that he whom they themselves call Knéph is ingener- 
able and immortal. 


CONCERNING THE THEORY OF EVEMERUS 


XXII. 1. Now, since many of such [? tombs] are 
spoken of and pointed out, those who think these 
[myths] commemorate the awe-inspiring and mighty 
works and passions of kings and tyrants who, through 
surpassing virtue and power, put in a claim for the 
reputation of divinity, and afterwards experienced 
reverses of fortune——employ a very easy means of 
escape from the [true] reason (Jogos), and not unworthily 
transfer the ill-omened [element in them] from Gods 
to men, and they have the following to help them from 
the narratives related. 

2. For instance, the Egyptians tell us that Hermes 
had a short-armed ® body, that Typhon was red-skinned, 

l Of, xxii. 3. 

2 Probably all name-plays: xtwy (dog), »/xv (conceive)—see 
Ixi. 6; H-dr-os, Or-idn ; &pe-ros (bear), s/apx (suffice, endure, 
bear); Ursa Major is called the Wain. 

3 yadt-dyxwva—lit., weasel-armed. Now, as we are told further 
on (lxxiv. 3) that the weasel (yaa%), or marten, was fabled to 
conceive through the ear and bring forth through the mouth, 
this animal was evidently a symbol of mind-conception. “ Weasel- 


armed” may thus symbolise some faculty of the interpretative 
mind (Hermes). 


296 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Horus white, and Osiris black, as though they were 
[men] born in the course of nature. é 

3. Moreover, also, they call Osiris “General” and 
Kanodbus? “ Pilot,’—from whom, they say, the star got 
its name. 

And [they say] that the ship which Greeks call Argo 
is an image of the bark. of Osiris, constellated in his 
honour, and that it sails not far from Oridn and Dog, 
the former of which Egyptians consider the sacred 
[boat] of Horus and the latter of Isis.? 

XXIII. 1. But I am afraid that this is “ moving the 
immoveable,” and “warring” not only “against many 
centuries,” according to Siménidés,? but “against 
many nations of men” and races held fast by religious 
feeling towards these Gods—when people let nothing 
alone but transfer such mighty names from heaven 
to earth, and [so] banish and dissolve the sense of 
worship and faith that has been implanted in nearly 
all [men] from their first coming into existence, 
opening up wide entrances for the godless folk,t and 
reducing the divine [mysteries] to the level of men’s 
doings, and giving a splendid licence to the charla- 
tanries of Evemerus® the Messenian, who of himself 
composing the counterpleas of a baseless science of 
myths unworthy of any credit, flooded the civilised 
world with sheer atheism, listing off level all those who 
are looked on as gods into names of generals and 
admirals and kings, who (he is good enough to say) 


1 Canopus was fabled to be the pilot of the bark of Osiris; in 
Greek mythology he was the pilot of the General Menelaos on 
his return from Troy, 

2 Of. xxi. 2. 3 Bergk, iii, 522. 

4 Or “atheists.” ‘An evident allusion to the Christians,” says 
King (zn loc.) ; but we think Plutarch was more impersonal than 
his commentator. 

5 E. flourished in the last quarter of the 4th century B.c. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 297 


existed in bygone days, and are recorded in letters of 
gold at Panchén,—which [records] neither any non- 
Greek nor any Greek has ever come across, but Evemerus 
alone, when he went his voyage to the Panchoans and 
Triphyllians, who never have been nor are anywhere 
on earth, 

XXIV. 1. And yet mighty. deeds of Semiramis are 
sung of among Assyrians, and mighty [deeds] of 
Sesdstris in Egypt. And Phrygians even unto this day 
call splendid and marvellous doings “ manic,” owing to 
the fact that Manes, one of their bygone kings, proved 
himself a good and strong man among them—the one 
whom some call Mazdes.? Cyrus led Persians and 
Alexander Macedonians, conquering to almost the 
ends of the earth; still they have the name and 
memory of good kings [only]. 

2. “And if some elated by vast boastfulness,” as 
Plato says “concomitant with youth and ignorance, 
through having their souls inflamed with pride,” have 
accepted titles like gods and dedications of temples, 
their glory has flourished for a short time [only], and 
afterwards they have incurred the penalty of vanity 
and imposture coupled with impiety and indecency :¢ 


Death coming swift on them, like smoke they rose and fell.é 


And now like runaway [slaves] that can be lawfully 


1 The capital, presumably, of the mythical island of Pancha, 
which was supposed to be somewhere on the southern coast of 
Asia, and to which Evemerus pretended he had sailed on a voyage 
down the Red Sea. 

? King notes: “The common title of the Sassanean kings was 
‘ Masdesin’—‘ servant of Ormazd,’” 

3 Legg., 716 a. 

* A bold thing to write in an age of Emperor-divinising. 

® Apparently from an otherwise unknown poet. See Bergk, 
iii, 637, 


298 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


taken, torn from the temples and altars, they have 
naught but their tombs and graves. 

3. Wherefore Antigonus the Elder, when a certain 
Hermodotus, in his poems, proclaimed him “Son of the 
Sun and God,” remarked: “ My night-stool boy has not 
so exalted an opinion of me.” 

And with reason also did Lysippus, the sculptor, 
blame Apelles, the painter, for putting a thunderbolt 
in Alexander’s hand when painting his portrait ; whereas 
he himself gave him a spear-head,—from which not 
even time itself shall take away the glory, for it is true 
and really his. 


THE THEORY OF THE DAIMONES 


XXV.! 1. They, therefore, [do] better who believe 
that the things related about Typhon and Osiris and 
Isis are passions neither of gods nor of men, but of 
mighty daimones, who—as Plato and Pythagoras and 
Xenocrates and Chrysippus say, following the theologers 
of bygone days—have been born more manful than 
men, far surpassing us in the strength of their nature, 
yet not having the divine unmixed and pure, but pro- 
portioned with the nature of soul and sense of body, 
susceptible of pleasure and pain and all the passions, 
which as innate to such metamorphoses trouble some 
[of them] more and others less. 

2.. For the Gigantic and Titanic [Passions] sung of 
among the Greeks, and certain lawless deeds of Kronos 
and antagonisms of Pythdn against Apollo, and fleeings 
of Dionysus, and wanderings of Demeter, in no way fall 
behind the Osiric and Typhonic [Passions], and others 
which all may hear unrestrainedly spoken of in myth. 

And all these things which, under the veil of mystic 


1 This chapter is quoted by Eusebius, Prep. Ev., V. v. 1. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 299 


sacred rites and perfectionings, are carefully kept from 
being spoken of to, or being allowed to be seen by, the 
multitude, have a similar reason (logos). 

XXVI. 1. Moreover, we hear Homer also on every 
occasion calling the good variously “godlike” and 
“ equal to gods,” and as “ having directions? from gods” ; 
whereas he employs epithets connected with the 
daimones to both worthy and unworthy in common: 


Draw nigh thou daimonian! Why so fearest the Argives ?® 
And again: 
But when indeed for the fourth time he charged, a daimon’s 
equal, 
And: 
O thou daimonian ! what so great ills do Priam now 


And Priam’s sons to thee, that thou dost hotly rage 
Troy’s well-built town to rase 75 


—as though the daimones possessed a mixed and an 
unbalanced nature and propensity. 

2. For which reason Plato® refers unto the God 
upon Olympus’ height things “right” and “odd,’’ and 
to the daimones those that respond to these.® 

3. Moreover, Xenocrates® thinks that the nefast 
days, and all the holy days on which are strikings or 
beatings or fastings or blasphemies or foul language, 
have nothing to do with honours paid to gods or to 
beneficent daimones; but that there are natures in 


' Sc. to the mysteries of the Egyptians. 

2 whdea—also meaning virilia, 

3 I1,, xiii, 810, 4 Il., v. 438. 

5 Il., iv. 31 f. ® Legg., 717 a. 

7 Pythagorean technical terms. 

8 ra davti¢wva—the meaning seeming to be rather that of 
“concord” than of “ discord.” 

® An immediate pupil of Plato’s, 


300 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


the circumambient,! mighty and powerful indeed, but 
difficult to turn and sullen, who take pleasure in such 
things, and when they get them turn to nothing worse. 

4, The beneficent and good ones, again, Hesiod also 
calls “holy daimones” and “guardians of men”— 
“wealth-givers and possessors of this sovereign pre- 
rogative.” 2 

5. Plato * again gives to this race the name of 
hermeneutic and of diaconic* ’twixt Gods and men, 
speeding up thitherwards men’s vows and prayers, 
and bringing thence prophetic answers hitherwards 
and gifts of [all] good things. 

6. Whereas Empedocles® says that the daimones have 
to amend whatever faults they make, or discords they 
may strike: 

“For ether’s rush doth chase them seawards; sea 
spews them on land’s flat; and earth into the beams of 
tireless sun; and he casts [them again] into the swirls 
of ether. One takes them from another, and all abhor 
[them] ” °—until after being thus chastened and purified 
they regain their natural place and rank. 

XXVII. 1. Born from the self-same womb as these 
and things like them, they say, are the legends about 
Typhon: how that he wrought dire deeds through envy 
and ill-will, and after throwing all things into confusion 
and filling the whole earth and sea as well with ills, 
he afterwards did make amends, 


1 The air or ether that surrounds the earth. 

2 Op. et Dies, 126. ; 3 Symp., 202 E. 

* That is, “interpretative and ministering.” 

5 K. flourished 494-434 B.o. 

6 Stein, 377 ff.; Karsten,°16 ff.; Fairbanks, p. 204. The 
quotation appears to me inapposite, for Empedocles seems to be 
speaking of “any who defile their bodies sinfully” and not of 
daimones; but perhaps the “received ” recombination of the 
fragments is at fault. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 301 


2. But the sister-wife! of Osiris who upheld his 
honour, after she had quenched and laid to rest 
Typhon’s frenzy and fury, did not allow forgetfulness 
and silence to overtake the struggles and trials he had 
endured, and her own wanderings and many [deeds] of 
wisdom, and many [feats] of manliness; but inter- 
mingling with the most chaste perfectionings images 
and under-meanings and copies of the passion she then 
endured, she hallowed at one and the same time a 
lesson of religion and a consolation to men and women 
placed in like circumstances:” 

3. And she and Osiris, being changed through virtue 
from good daimones into gods *~as [were] subsequently 
Heracles and Dionysus—possess the dignities of gods 
and daimones at one and the same time, fitly combined 
everywhere indeed but with the greatest power among 
those above earth and under earth. 


CONCERNING SARAPIS 


4, For they say that Sarapis is no other than Pluto, 
and Isis Persephassa, as Archemachus of Eubcea has 
said, and Heracleides of Pontus, when he supposes that 
the seat of the oracle at Canopus is Pluto’s. 

XXVIII. 1. And Ptolemy the Saviour* saw in a 
dream the gigantic statue of Pluto—though he had not 
previously seen or known what form it was—ordering 
him to bring it to Alexandria. 


1 See the note on “sister-wife” in comment on Mariamné 
(Hipp., Philos—Introd.) in chapter on “ Myth of Man.”—Prolegg., 
p. 147, n. 7. 

3 That is to say, according to this theory the myth represented 
the degree of initiation by which a man passed from the stage of 
daimon into the state of god, or from super-man to christ. 

3 Miiller, iv. 315. . 

* The first Greek King of Egypt, 324-285 B.o. 


302 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


2. And when he did not know and had no idea 
where [the statue] was set up even after he had 
described his vision to his friends, there was found a 
man, a great traveller, by name Sdsibius, who said he 
had seen at Sinopé just such a colossus as the King 
seemed to have seen. 

3. He [Ptolemy] accordingly sent Sdtelés and Dio- 
nysius, who, after expending much time and pains, not, 
however, without the help of God’s providence, removed 
it secretly and brought it away. 

4, And when it had been brought [to Alexandria] 
and set up publicly, the assistants of Timotheus, the 
intrepreter, and of Manethés, the Sebennyte, coming to 
the conclusion that it was a statue of Pluto—judging 
by its cerberus and huge serpent—convinced Ptolemy 
that it was that of no other of the Gods than Sarapis ; 
for it did not come from Sinopé with this designation, 
but after it had been brought to Alexandria it received 
the Egyptian name for Pluto, namely, Sarapis. 

5. And yet people sink into the opinion of Heracleitus 
the physicist, when he says: “Hades? and Dionysus 
are the same, for whomsoever they rage and riot.” 

For those who postulate that Hades means the body, 
because the soul is as it were deranged and drunken 
in it, put forward a [too] meagre interpretation. 

6. But [it is] better to identify Osiris with Dionysus, 
and Sarapis? with Osiris, so designated after he had 
changed his nature.* Wherefore “Sarapis” is common 
to all, just as, you know, those who share in the 
sacred rites know that “ Osiris” is. 


1 That is, Pluto. 

2 Sar-apis—a combination of Osiris and Apis, the soul of 
Osiris ; cf. xxix. 5. In Eg. Asar-Hapi. 

3 Presumably from that of a daimon to that of a god. 

4 That is, apparently, a common principle in all men. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 38038 


XXIX, 1. For it is not worth while paying attention 
to the Phrygian writings, in which Isis is said to have 
been the daughter of Charops,! son of Heracles, and 
Typhon [son] of Aacus,? [also] son of Heracles. 

2. Nor [is it worth while] refraining from disregarding 
Phylarchus? when he writes that “it was Dionysus 
who first brought two oxen from India to Egypt, of 
which the name of one was Apis, and of the other 
Osiris ; and Sarapis is the name of Him who orders [or 
adorns] the universe from satrein [‘sweep,’ ‘clean’ ], 
which some say [means] ‘ beautifying’ and ‘ adorning’ ” ; 
—for these [remarks] of Phylarchus are absurd. 

3. But still more so are those of them who say that 
Sarapis is not a god, but that the coffin of Apis‘ is 
thus named, and that certain brazen gates at Memphis, 
called “Gates of Oblivion and Wailing,” open with a 
deep mournful sound, when they bury Apis, and that 
therefore at every sounding of brass® we are plunged 
into oblivion. 

4, More moderate are they who claim that the 


1 Lit. “ Bright- (or Glad-) eyed.” 

2 Lit., “ Wailer.” 

3 A historian ; flourished c. 215 B.c. 

4 “Amdos odpov—another word-play, “ sor-apis.” 

5 axotyros . . . xadnduaros. This has, nevertheless, pre- 
sumably some mystic meaning. In the myths, cymbals were said 
to have been used to protect the infant Bacchus, and infant Zeus, 
and to keep off the Titans—so, presumably, plunging them into 
oblivion. Compare also 1 Corinth. xiii. 1, where Paul, speaking 
of the exercise of the “gift of tongues” (glossalaly) without love 
(ayden), uses precisely the same term, when saying: “I am 
become.as sounding brass (xaAxds x@v) or tinkling cymbal”—the 
latter being, perhaps, a reference to the sistrum, while the former 
is perhaps a metaphor, derived from the hardness and colour 
(“red”) of brass, or rather bronze or copper, referring to a state 
of mind which plunges us into oblivion of our better part— 
namely, spiritual love. 


304 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


simultaneous motion of the universe is thus called [sc. 
Sarapis], from seuesthai and sousthai [“ speed ”). 

5. But the majority of the priests say that “Osiris” 
and “ Apis” have been woven together into the same 
[name], explaining and teaching that we should look 
on the Apis as an en-formed image of the soul of Osiris, 

6. If, however, the name of Sarapis is Egyptian, I 
for my part think it denotes “Good Cheer” and 
“ Delight,’—finding a proof in the fact that Egyptians 
call the feast “ Delights ”—Sazrez. 

And, indeed, Plato says that Hades has been so called 
as being “sweet”? and gentle to those with him. 

7. And with Egyptians both many other of their 
names are Jogoi,2 and they call subterrene space, to 
which they think the souls depart after death, Amenthé 
—the name signifying “the [space] which takes and 
gives.” 4 

8. But whether this, too, is one of the names that 
left Hellas long ago and have been brought back again,5 
we will examine later on; for the present, let us continue 
with the remainiag [points] of the belief we have in 
hand. 


CONCERNING TYPHON 


XXX. 1. Osiris and Isis have, then, changed from 
good daimones into gods. While as for the dimmed 
and shattered power of Typhon, though it is at the last 


1 A contracted form of the former—from /oFe or \/oeF, with 
idea of “swiftness.” (7) Serapits—sev-a-this—sevesthat. 

2 &§0vc10ov—unknown to the lexicons. I suggest that it may 
be connected with jdos, from /oFad of av8dvw—hence “sweet.” 

3 Presumably “words of deep meaning”—-another technical 
use of this Proteus-like term. 

4 Budge (op. ctt., ii, 200) says: “The Egyptian form of the 
word is Amentet, and the name means ‘hidden place.’” 

5 How very Greek! (Cf. lxi. 4. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 305 


gasp and in its final death-throes, they still appease 
and soothe it with certain feasts of offerings. 

2. Yet, again, every now and then at certain festivals 
they humiliate it dreadfully and treat it most despite- 
fully,—even to rolling red-skinned men in the mud, 
and driving an ass over a precipice (as the Koptos folk), 
because Typhon was born with his skin red and ass-like. 
While the Busiris folk and Lycopolitans do not use 
trumpets at all, as they sound like an ass [braying]. 

3. And generally they think that the ass is not clean, 
but a daimonic animal, on account of its resemblance to 
that [god]; and making round-cakes for feasts of offer- 
ings on both the month of Payni and that of Phadphi,} 
they stamp on them an “ ass tied.” * 

4, And on the Feast of Offerings of the Sun, they 
pass the word to the worshippers not to wear on the 
body things made of gold nor to give food to an ass,® 

5. The Pythagorics also seem to consider Typhon a 
daimonic power ; for they say that Typhon was produced 
on the six-and-fiftieth even measure; and again that 
the [power *] of the equilateral triangle is that of Hades 
and Dionysus and Ares; that of the square is that of 
Rhea and Aphrodite and Demeter and Hestia (that is, 
Hera); that of the dodecagon, that of Zeus; and that of — 
the fifty-six angled [regular polygon], that of Typhon— 
as Eudoxus relates.® 

1 Copt. Padni and Paopi—corr. roughly with June and October. 

2 dvoy dedenévov. Cf. Matt, xxi. 2: dvov Sedeuévny ; cf, also 1. 3, 
where it is a hippopotamus, 

3 That is, presumably, not to weigh down their minds with the 
superfiuity of riches, nor to feed up the stupid and lustful energies 
of their souls, 

4A “power” in Pythagorean technology is the side of a 
square (or, perhaps, of any equilateral polygon) in geometry ; and 
in arithmetic the square root, or that which being multiplied into 
itself produces the square. 

5 Eudoxus seems to have been Plutarch’s authority for his 

VOL. I. 20 


306 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


XXXI. 1. And, as Egyptians believe that Typhon was 
born red-skinned,! they offer in sacrifice even the red 
ones of the oxen [only] after making the scrutiny so close, 
that if [the beast] has even a single hair black or white, 
they consider it ought not to be offered ; for if it were 
sacrificed, it would not be an acceptable offering to the 
gods, but the contrary, [as are] all those animals which 
have seized on the souls of impure and unrighteous men 
in the course of their transformation into bodies other 
[than human]. 

2. Wherefore after uttering imprecations on the head 
of the victim,” and cutting off its head, they used to 
cast it into the river in olden days, but nowadays 
they give it to strangers. 

3. But as to the one that is to be sacrificed, those of 
the priests who are called Sealers, set a mark upon it— 
the seal (as Kastér* relates) having the impression of a 
man forced down on one knee with his hands drawn 
round behind him, and a sword sticking in his throat.‘ 

4, And they think that the ass also has the distinction 
of its resemblance [to Typhon], as has been said, owing 
to its aversion to being taught and to its wantonness, 
no less than on account of its skin.® 

5. For which cause also since they especially detested 


statements regarding Pythagorean doctrine ; cf. vi., lii., lxii. The 
Typhonic figure might be generated by “sevening” the interior 
angles of a regular octagon and producing the radii to the cireum- 
ference of the circumscribed circle, or by “eighting” the interior 
angles of a regular heptagon. 

1 Or “ fire-coloured.” 

2 Compare the Ritual of Azazel (the scape-goat), one of the 
two goats set apart on the Great Day of Atonement among the 
Jews (Lev. xvi. 8 ff.). 

3 Of. also Plut., Htia Romana, x. Castor was a Greek historian 
who was a contemporary of Cicero and Julius Cesar. 

4 The ox was, therefore, the vicarious atonement of the man. 

5 It was a red ass, then, which symbolised the Typhonic power. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 307 


Ochus! of [all] the Persian kings as being blood-polluted 
and abominable, they gave him the nickname of “ Ass.” 

But he, with the retort: “This Ass, however, will 
make a fine feast off your Ox”—slaughtered the Apis, 
as Deinén has told us.? 

6. Those, however, who say that Typhon’s flight from 
the fight on an ass lasted seven days, and that after 
reaching a place of safety he begat sons—Hierosolymus 
and Judzeus—are instantly convicted of dragging Judaic 
matters into the myth.* 


THE THEORY OF THE PHYSICISTS 


XXXII. 1.4 The above [data] then afford [us] such 
and such suggestions. But from another start let us 
consider the simplest of those who seem to give a more 
philosophical explanation. 

2. ThéSe are those who say that, just as the Greeks 
allegorise time as Kronos, and air as Hera, and the 
changes of air into fire as the generation of Hephestus, 
so, with the Egyptians, Osiris uniting with Isis (earth) 
is Neilos, and Typhon is the sea, into which Neilos 
falling vanishes and is dispersed, except such part [of 
him] as the earth takes up and receives, and so becomes 
endowed with productiveness by him. 

3. And there is a sacred dirge made on Kronos —and 
it laments “him who is born in the left-hand and died 
in the right-hand parts.” 


1 Of. xi. 4, 

2 Miiller, ii. 95. Deindn was a contemporary of Alexander the 
Great, and wrote a history of Persia. 

3 This item of ancient scandal would almost seem to have come 
from the pen of an Apion ; it is an interesting specimen of theo- 
logical controversy in story-form, 

4 This paragraph and the next is quoted by Eusebius, Prep, 
Ev., III. iii. 11, 5 That is Nile. 


308 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


4. For Egyptians think that the eastern [parts] of 
cosmos are “ face,” the northern “right hand,” and the 
southern “left hand.” 

5. The Nile, accordingly, since it flows from the 
southern [parts] and is consumed by the sea in the 
northern, is naturally said to have its birth in the left 
hand and its death in the right hand. 

6. Wherefore the priests both pronounce the sea 
expiate and call salt “Typhon’s foam”; and one of the 
chief prohibitions they have is: “Not to set salt on 
table.” And they do not give greeting to sailors, 
because they use the sea, and get their living from it. 
And for this cause chiefly they accuse fish of being a 
cause of offence, and write up: “ Hate fish!” 

7. At anyrate at Sais, in the entrance of the temple 
of Athena, there used to be chiselled up “babe,” “old 
man,” and after that “ hawk,” then “ fish,” and last of all 
“ hippopotamus.” 

8. This meant in symbols: “O ye who are being 
born and are dying, God hates shamelessness.” 

9. For “babe” is the symbol of birth, and “old man” 
of death, and by “hawk” they mean God, and by “ fish” 
hatred—as has been said on account of the sea—and 
by “hippopotamus” shamelessness, for it is fabled that 
after it has killed its sire it violates its dam. 

10. Moreover, what is said by the Pythagorics, 
namely, that the sea is the tears of Kronos, would seem 
to riddle the fact of its not being pure and cognate 
with itself. 

11. Let these things then be stated from outside 
sources as matters of common information. 

XXXTII. 1. But the more wise of the priests call not 
only the Nile Osiris, and the sea Typhon; but [they 

1 Lit., “pilots”; but presumably here used in a more general 
sense, 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 309 


call] without exception every source and power that 
moistens, Osiris—considering [him] cause of generation 
and essence of seed, and Typhon everything dry and 
fiery, and of a drying nature generally and one hostile 
to moisture. 

2. And for this cause also, as they think he [Typhon] 
was born with a reddish-yellow body, somewhat pale, 
they do not by any means readily meet or willingly 
associate with men that look like this. 

3. On-the other hand, again, they say in the language 
of myth that Osiris was born black, because all [Nile] 
water blackens both earth and garments and clouds 
when mixed [with them], and [because] moisture in 
the young makes their hair black, whereas greyness 
comes on those past their prime, as though it were a 
turning pale owing to its drying up. 

4. The spring, too, is blooming and productive and 
balmy; but autumn, through lack of moisture, is 
inimical to plants and baneful to animals. 

5. And the ox that is kept at Sun-city which they 
call Mnevis—sacred to Osiris, while some also consider 
it sire of Apis—is black [also] and has second honours 
after Apis. 

6. Moreover, they call Egypt, since it is especially 
black-soiled, just like the black of the eye, Chémia, and 
liken it to a heart; for it is warm and moist, and is 
mostly confined in, and adjacent to, the southern part 
of the civilised world, just like the heart [is] in man’s 
left-hand side. 

XXXIV. 1. Moreover, they say that sun and moon 
do not use chariots for vehicles, but sail round in boats 
—({thus] riddling their being nourished by and being 
born in the “ Moist.” 

2. And they think that Homer also, like Thales, set 
down Water as source and birth of all things, after 


310 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


learning [it] from Egyptians; for that Oceanus is Osiris, 
and Téthys ! Isis, as nursing all things and rearing them 
all up together. 

3. For Greeks also call “ emission of seed” dz-ovoiav 
and “intercourse” gvy-ovoiay, and “‘son” (uiov) from 
“water” (dédaros) and “moisten” (joa);? and [they 
call] Dionysus Hués, as lord of the Moist Nature, in 
that he is no other than Osiris. 

4. In fact, Hellanicus* seems to have heard Osiris 
called Hu-siris by the priests; for he persists in thus 
calling the god, presumably from his nature and power 
of invention.* 


CONCERNING OSIRIS AND DIONYSUS 


XXXV. 1. That, however, he is the same as Dionysus 
-—who should know better than thou thyself, O Klea, 
who art Archi-charila® of the Thyiades at Delphi, 


1 As connected with T#@n, the Nurse of all, and identified by 
some with the Primal Earth ; and so signified by the word-play 
Tydy and 7Onv-ovperny (“ nursing ”), 

2 The word-play runs; ap-ous-ia, sun-ous-ia, hu-ion, hud-atos, 
hus-ai. 

3 The most eminent of the Greek logographers ; fl. 553-504 B.c. 

4 ¢bpécews—probably another word-play, heuresis and husiris, 

5 The text reads &pxueAa—an apparently impossible collection 
of letters. As no one has so far purged the reading, I would 
suggest xdpiAay or adpxi-xdpiAavy, Stending (in Roscher, s.v.) 
reminds us of the myth of the orphan maid Charila, who during 
a famine begged alms at the gate of the palace of the King of 
ancient Delphi; the King not only refused her, but drove her 
away slapping her face with his shoe. Whereupon the little 
maid for shame hanged herself. After the famine was over the 
Oracle decreed an atonement for her death. And so every 
nine years an effigy made to represent Charila was done to 
death, and then carried off by the leader of the Thyiades (or 
priestesses of Bacchus), and buried, with a rope round its neck, 
in a gorge. Of. Harrison (Jane E.), Prolegomena to the Study of 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 3811 


and wast dedicated to the Osiriaca before thou. 
wert born ?? 

But if for the sake of others we must quote testi- 
monies, let us leave the things that must not be spoken 
of in their proper place. 

2. The rites, however, which the priests perform in 
burning the Apis, when they transport its body on a 
raft, in no way fall short of a Bacchic Orgy. For they 
put on fawn-skins and carry thyrsuses,? and shout and 
dance just like those inspired at celebrations of the 
Mysteries of Dionysus. 

3. Wherefore many of the Greeks make Dionysus 
also bull-formed; while the women of the Eleians 
invoke him praying “the god with the bull’s foot to 
come” to them. 

4, The Argives, moreover, give Dionysus the epithet 
of “ bull-born,” and they call him up out of the water 
with the sound of trumpets, casting a lamb into the 
abyss for the Gate-keeper.2 The trumpets they hide 
in thyrsi, as Socrates has said in his “[Books] on 
Rites.” + 

5. The Titanic [Passions] also and the [Dionysian] 
Night-rites agree with what we are told about the 
tearings-in-pieces and revivings and palingeneses of 
Osiris ; and similarly the [stories] of the burials. 

Greek Religion (Cambridge, 1903), p. 106. As Klea was leader of 
the Thyiades, this office fell to her; it may, therefore, even be 
that her name is some play on Charila. 

1 Lit., “from father and mother.” 

2 Symbolic wands, generally cane-like or knotted like a 
bamboo, and sometimes 409 in ivy and vine leaves, with a 


“pine-cone at top. 

3 + mvaadxy. 

4 Miiller, iv. 498. This was probably Socrates of Cos, who is 
known to have been the author of a work entitled ’EmAfoets Ocdv 
(e.g. Dion. Laért., ii. 4), meaning either “Prayers to the Gods,” 
or “Surnames of the Gods.” 


312 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


6. For both Egyptians point to tombs of Osiris 
everywhere, as has been said,! and [also] Delphians 
believe the relics of Dionysus are deposited with them 
by the side of the Oracle, and the Holy Ones offer an 
offering, of which we must not speak, in the fane of 
Apollo, when the Thyiades awake “Him of the 
winnowing fan.” 

7. And that Greeks consider Dionysus to be lord and 
prince not only of wine, but of every moist nature, 
Pindar witnesses sufficiently when he sings: 

May gladsome Dionysus make the pasturage of trees to grow— 

Pure light of autumn.? 

8. For which cause also they who give worship to 
Osiris are forbidden to destroy a cultivated tree or to 
stop up a water-source. 


THE THEORY OF THE PHYSICISTS RESUMED 


XXXVI. 1. And they call not only the Nile, but also 
without distinction all that is moist, “ Osiris’ efflux” ; 
and the water-vase always heads the processions of the 
priests in honour of the God. 

2. And with “rush”*® they write “king” and the 
“southern climate” of the cosmos; and “rush” is 
interpreted as “watering” and “conception” of all 
things, and is supposed to resemble in its nature the 
generative member. 

3. And when they keep the feast Pamylia, which is 
phallic, as has been said,* they bring out and carry 
round an image having a phallus three times the size 
of it. 

1 Of. xx. 5. 2 Bergk, i. 433. 

3 @pov—confounded by King (in loc.) with Opiov, “fig leaf” 
(perhaps connected with rpls, from the three lobes of the leaf) ; 
the “rush” is presumably the papyrus. 4 Of. xii. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 313 


4, For God is source, and every source by the power 
of generation makes manifold that which comes from 
it. And “many times” we are accustomed to call 
“thrice,” as, for instance, “thrice-blessed,” and “three 
times as many, endless, bonds”!— unless, indeed, 
“three fold” was used in its authentic meaning by 
those of old; for the Moist Nature, as being source and 
genesis of all, moved from the beginning the first three 
bodies—earth, air, and fire. 

5. For the logos that is superadded to the myth— 
how that Typhon cast the chief part of Osiris into the 
river, and Isis could not find it, but after dedicating an 
object answering to it, and having made it ready, she 
commanded them to keep the Phallephoria in its honour 
—comes to this: namely, an instruction that the 
generative and spermatic [powers] of the God had 
moisture as their first matter, and by means of moisture 
were immingled with those things which have been 
produced to share in genesis. 

6. But there is another logos of the Egyptians—that 
Apophis, as brother of the Sun, made war on Zeus, and 
that when Osiris fought on his [Zeus’] side and helped 
him to conquer his foe, Zeus ndontee him as his son 
and called him Dionysus. 

7. Moreover, the mythical nature of this logos goes 
to show that it connects with the truth about nature. 
For Egyptians call [Cosmic] Breath? Zeus—to which 
Dry and Fiery is hostile; this [latter] is not the Sun, 
but it has a certain kinship with him. And Moisture, 
by quenching the excess of Dryness, increases and 
strengthens the exhalations by which the Breath 
nourishes itself and waxes strong. 

XXXVII. 1. Moreover, both Greeks consecrate the 


! Bernardakis gives the references as JI., vi. 154 and viii. 340, 
but I am unable to verify them. 2 Or “Spirit” (rvedua). 


314 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


ivy to Dionysus and [also] among Egyptians it is said 
to be called chen-osiris—the name meaning, they say, 
“ Osiris-plant.” 

2. Further, Ariston, who wrote Colonies of the 
Athenians, came across some Letter or other of Alex- 
archus’s,! in which it is related that Dionysus, as son 
of Osiris and Isis, is not called Osiris but Arsaphés by 
the Egyptians—([this is] in Ariston’s first book)—the 
name signifying ‘‘ manliness.” 

3. Hermeus also supports this in the first book of 
his Concerning the Egyptians, for he says that “ Osiris” 
is, when translated, “Strong.” * 

4. I disregard Mnaseas,> who associated Dionysus 
and Osiris and Sarapis with Epaphos ;* I also disregard 
Anticleides,° who says that Isis, as daughter of Pro- 
metheus,® lived with Dionysus; for the peculiarities 
which have been stated about the festivals and offerings 
carry a conviction with them that is clearer than the 
witnesses [I have produced]. 

XXXVIII. 1. And of the stars they consider Sirius 
to be Isis’s7—as being a water-bringer. And they 
honour the Lion, and ornament the doors of the 
temples with gaping lions’ mouths; since Nilus over- 
flows : 

When first the Sun doth with the Lion join.® 


1 Ariston and Alexarchus and Hermeus (cf. xlii. 7) seem to be 
otherwise unknown to fame. 


2 SuBpimos =oBpiwos—strong, virile, manly. Of. the Eleusinian | 


sacred name Brimos for Iacchos, 

3 Flourished latter half of 3rd century B.c. 

4 Son of Zeus and Io, born in the Nile, after the long wander- 
ings of his mother. He is fabled by the Greeks to have been 
subsequently King of Egypt and to have built Memphis. Hero- 
dotus (ii. 153 ; iii. 27, 28) says that Epaphos= Apis. 

5 A Greek writer subsequent to the time of Alexander the Great. 

6 Of. iii. 1. 7 But ef. lxi. 5. 8 Aratus, Phenom., 351. 


a 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 315 


2. And as they hold the Nile to be “Osiris’s eftlux,” 
- so too they think earth Isis’s body—not all [of it], but 
what the Nile covers, sowing [her] with seed and 
mingling with her; and from this intercourse they 
give birth to Horus. ; 

3. And Horus is the season (pa) and [fair] blend of 
air that keeps and nourishes all in the atmosphere— 
who, they say, was nursed by Léto in the marshes 
round Butd; for the watery and soaked-through earth 
especially nourishes the exhalations that quench and 
abate dryness and drought. 

4, And they call the extremities of the land, both on 
the borders and where touching the sea, Nephthys; 
for which cause they give Nephthys the name of 
“End,” ! and say she lives with Typhon. 

5. And when the Nile exceeds its boundaries and 
overflows more than usual, and [so] consorts with the 
extreme districts, they call it the union of Osiris with 
Nephthys—proof of which is given by the ‘springing 
up of plants, and especially of the honey-clover,* for it 
was by its falling [from Osiris] and being left behind 
that Typhon was made aware of the wrong done to his 
bed. Hence it is that Isis conceived Horus in lawful 
wedlock, but Nephthys Anubis clandestinely. 

6. In the Successions of the Kings,? however, they 
record that when Nephthys was married to Typhon, 
she was at first barren; and if they mean this to apply 
not to a woman but to their Goddess, they enigmatically 
refer to the utterly unproductive nature of the land 
owing to sterility. 

XXXIX. 1. The conspiracy and despotism of Typhon, 
moreover, was the power of drought getting the 
mastery over and dispersing the moisture which both 
generates the Nile and increases it. 


1 Of. xii. 6. 2 Of, xiv. 6. 3 Of. xi. 4. 


316 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


2. While his helper, the Aithiopian queen,’ riddles 
southerly winds from Athiopia. For when these prevail 
over the Annuals? (which drive the clouds towards 
Ethiopia), and prevent the rains which swell the Nile 
from bursting—Typhon takes possession and scorches ; 


and thus entirely mastering the Nile he forces him out 


into the sea, contracted into himself through weakness 
and flowing empty and low. 

3. For the fabled shutting-up of Osiris into the 
coffin is, perhaps, nothing but a riddle of the occultation 
and disappearance of water. Wherefore they say that 
Osiris disappeared in the mofhth of Athyr,3— when, 
the Annuals ceasing entirely, the Nile sinks, and the 
land is denuded, and, night lengthening, darkness 
increases, and the power of the light wanes and is 
mastered, and the priests perform both other melan- 
choly rites, and, covering a cow made entirely of gold* 
with a black coat of fine linen as a mask of mourning 
for the Goddess—for they look on the “cow” as an 
image of Isis and as the earth—they exhibit it for 
four days from the seventeenth consecutively. 

4, For the things mourned for are four: first, the 
Nile failing and sinking; second, the northern winds 


being completely extinguished by the southern gaining ~ 


the mastery; third, the day becoming less than the 
night; and, finally, the denudation of the earth, 
together with the stripping of the trees which shed 
their leaves at that time. 

5. And on the nineteenth, at night they go down to 
the sea; and the keepers and priests carry out the 


1 Aso; of. xiii. 3. 

2 The “ Etesian” winds, which in Egypt blew from the N.W. 
during the whole summer. 

3 Copt. Hathor—corr. roughly with November. 

4 Cf. “the golden calf” incident of the Exodus story. 


a aye 


i al a a 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 317 


sacred chest, having within it a small golden vessel, 
into which they take and pour fresh water ; and shouts 
are raised by the assistants as though Osiris were found. 

6. Afterwards they knead productive soil with the 
water, and mixing with it sweet spices and fragrant 
incense, they mould it into a little moon-shaped image 
of very costly stuffs. And they dress it up and deck 
it out,—showing that they consider these Gods the 
essence of earth and water. 

XL. 1, And when again Isis recovers Osiris and 
makes Horus grow, strengthened with exhalations and 
moist clouds——Typhon is indeed mastered, but not 
destroyed. 

2. For the Mistress and Goddess of the earth did 
not allow the nature which is the opposite of moisture to 
be destroyed entirely, but she slackened and weakened 
it, wishing that the blend should continue; for it was 
not possible the cosmos should be perfect, had the fiery 
[principle] ceased and disappeared. 

3. And if these things are not said contrary to proba- 
bility, it is probable also that one need not reject that 
logos also,—how that Typhon of old got possession of the 
share of Osiris ; for Egypt was [once] sea.” 

4. For which cause many [spots] in its mines and 
_ mountains are found even to this day to contain shells ; 
and all springs and all wells—and there are great 
numbers of them—have brackish and bitter water, as 
though it were the stale residue of the old-time sea 
collecting together into them. 

5. But Horus in time got the better of Typhon,— 
that is, a good season of rains setting in, the Nile driving 
out the sea made the plain reappear by filling it up 
again with its deposits,—a fact, indeed, to which our 

1 Another proof of the common persuasion that there had been 
a Flood in Egypt. 


318 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


senses bear witness; for we see even now that as the 
river brings down fresh mud, and advances the land 
little by little, the deep water gradually diminishes, 
and the sea recedes through its bottom being heightened 
by the deposits. 

6. Moreover, [we see] Pharos, which Homer? knew 
as a day’s sail distant from Egypt, now part [and parcel] 
of it; not that the [island] itself has sailed to land,? 
or extended itself shorewards, but because the inter- 
vening sea has been forced back by the river’s reshaping 
of and adding to the mainland. 

7. These [explanations], moreover, resemble the theo. 
logical dogmas laid down by the Stoics,—for they also 
say that the generative and nutritive Breath [or Spirit] 
is Dionysus; the percussive and separative, Heracles ; 
the receptive, Ammon [Zeus]; that which extends 
through earth and fruits, Demeter and Koré; and that 
[which extends] through sea, Poseidon.’ 


THe THEORY OF THE MATHEMATICI 


XLI. 1. Those, however, who combine with the 
above [considerations] of the Physicists some of the 
Mathematic [doctrines] derived from star-lore, think that 
the solar cosmos is called Typhon and the lunar Osiris.‘ 

2. For [they think] that the Moon, in that its light 
is generative and moistening, is favourable both for 
breedings of animals and sproutings of plants; whereas 
the Sun, with untempered and harsh fire, burns and 


1 T1., iv. 355. 

2 A play on the “day’s sail” (Spéuov) and ava-Spauoicay. 

3 It is, of course, a very poor interpretation of the myth to talk 
only about floods and desert, sea and rain, etc. These are all 
facts illustrating the underlying truth, but they are not the real 
meaning. 

4 This is a worse guess than even that of the Physicists. Cf. li. 5. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 319 


withers up [all] that are growing and blowing, and 
with fiery heat renders the major part of the earth 
entirely uninhabitable, and in many places utterly 
masters the Moon. . 

3. For which cause Egyptians always call Typhon 
Séth,.—that is, “that which oppresses and constrains 
by force.” 

4, And they have a myth that Heracles is settled in 
the Sun and accompanies him in his revolutions, while 
Hermes does the same with the Moon. 

5. For the [revolutions] of the Moon resemble works 
of reason (logos) and super-abundant wisdom, while 
those of the Sun are like penetrating strokes [given] 
with force and power.” 

6. Moreover, the Stoics say that the sun is kept 
burning and nourished from the sea,? whereas to the 
Moon the waters of springs and lakes send up a sweet 
and mild exhalation, ; 

XLII. 1. The Egyptian myth runs that the death of 
Osiris took place on the seventeenth, when the full- 
moon is most conspicuously at the full. 

2. Wherefore the Pythagoreans call this day also 
“Tnterception,”* and regard this number as expiable. 

3. For the “sixteen” being square and the “ eighteen ” 
oblong °—which alone of plane numbers happen to have 
their perimeters equal to the areas contained by them ® 
—the mean, “seventeen,” coming between them, inter- 
cepts and divorces them from one another, and divides 

1 Of. Ixii. 2 et al. 

2 Cf. the Stoic attributes of Heracles in xl. 7. 

3 If this is intended for the Great Sea of Space, it would be 
credible. 4 ayrippatiy. 


5 Square and Oblong were two of the fundamental “ pairs of 
opposites” among the Pythagoreans. Cf. xlviii. 5. 


' 


320 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


the ratio of “nine” to “eight”! by being cut into 
unequal intervals, 

4. And eight-and-twenty is the number of years 
which some say Osiris lived, and others that he reigned ; ? 
for this is the number of the lights of the Moon, and it 
rolls out its own circle in this number of days. 

5, And at what they call the Burials of Osiris they 
cut the tree-trunk and make it into a crescent-shaped 
coffin, because the Moon, when it approaches the Sun, 
becomes crescent-shaped and hides itself away. 

6. And the tearing of Osiris into fourteen pieces 
they refer enigmatically to the days in which the 
luminary wanes after full-moon up to new-moon. 

7. And the day on which it first appears, escaping 
from his beams and passing by the Sun, they call 
“Imperfect Good.” 

8. For Osiris is “Good-doer.” The name, indeed, 
means many things, but chiefly what they call “ Might 
energising and good-doing.” And the other name of 
the God,—Omphis, Hermzus® says, means [also] when 
translated, “ Benefactor.” 

XLITI. 1, Moreover, they think that the risings of the 
Nile have a certain analogy with the lights of the 
Moon. 

2. For the greatest [rising], about Elephantiné, is 
eight-and-twenty cubits, the same number as are the 
lights and measures of its monthly periods; and the 
least, about Mendes and Xois, is of six cubits, 
[analogous] to the half-moon; while the mean, about 
Memphis, when it is the right quantity, [is] of fourteen 
cubits, [analogous] to the full-moon. 


1 The sesquioctave. In areas 8 is half of 16, and 9 of 18; 
while in a proportional measuring-rod or canon of 27 units, inter- 
vals of 8, 9, and 10 units succeeding one another complete the 27. 

Cf. xiii. 8, 9. 3 Of. xxxviil. 2. . 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 321 


3. And [they consider] the Apis the animated image 
of Osiris, and that he is conceived whenever generative 
light from the Moon fastens on a cow in heat. 

4, For which cause also many of the markings of 
the Apis—lights shading off into darks—resemble the 
configurations of the moon. 

5. Moreover, on the new-moon of the month 
Phamenoth' they keep festival, calling it “ Entrance”? 
of Osiris into the Moon, as it is the beginning of 
spring. 

6. By thus placing the power of Osiris in the Moon, 
they mean that Isis consorts with him while being [at 
the same time] the cause of his birth? 

7. For which cause also they call the Moon Mother 
of the cosmos, and think that she has a male-female 
nature,—for she is filled by the Sun and made pregnant, 
and again of herself sends forth and disseminates into 
the air generative principles. 

8. For [they say] she does not always overmaster 
the destruction wrought by Typhon;* but, though 
frequently mastered, even when bound hand and foot 
she frees herself again by her generative power, and 
fights the way through to Horus. 

9.. And Horus is the cosmos surrounding the earth— 
not entirely exempt from destruction either, nor yet 
from generation. 

‘XLIV. 1. Some, moreover, make out of the myth a 
riddle of the phenomena of eclipses also, 

2. For the Moon is eclipsed at the full, when the 
Sun has the station opposite it, she entering the shadow 
of the earth,—just as they say Osiris [entered] the 


1 Copt. the same—roughly corr. to March. 

2 &uBacw—or perhaps “ Embarking.” 

3 That is, is both wife and mother. 

4 Typhon being the Sun according to this theory. 
VOL. I. 21 


322 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


coffin. And she again conceals the Sun and causes 
him to disappear, on the thirtieth [of the month], 
though she does not entirely destroy him, as neither 
did Isis Typhon. 

3. And when Nephthys conceives Anubis, Isis adopts 
him, For Nephthys is that which is below the earth 
and non-manifest, while Isis [is] that which is above the 
earth and manifest. 

4, And the circle just touching them and called 
“ Horizon,” as being common to both of them, has been 
called Anubis, and is likened to a dog for its character- 
istic; for the dog has the use of its sight both by 
day and nightalike. 

5. And Anubis seems to possess this power among 
Egyptians—just as Hecate with Greeks—being at one 
and the same time chthonian and olympian.? 

6. Some, however, think that Anubis is Kronos; ? 
wherefore as he breeds all things out of himself and 
conceives («’wy) [all] in himself, he got the name of Dog 
(xuwv). 

7. There is, then, for the worshippers of Anubis some 
[mystery] or other that may not be spoken of? 

8. In olden times, indeed, the dog enjoyed the 
highest honours in Egypt; but seeing that when 
Cambyses‘ slew the Apis and cast it out, no [animal] 
approached or touched its carcase but only the dog, he 
[thus] lost the [distinction of] being first and most 
honoured of the rest of the animals, 

9. There are some, however, who call the shadow of 
the earth into which they think the Moon falls and is 
eclipsed, Typhon. 


1 That is, infernal and celestial, 2 In the sense of Time. 
3 This seems to suggest that Plutarch, though he faithfully 
records what “ people ys ” by no means wishes his readers to 
believe them. * But see xi, 4 and xxxi, 4. 


Or a a eer 


& 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 323 


THE THEORY OF THE DUALISTS 


XLV. 1. From [all of] which it seems not unreasonable 
to conclude that no simple [explanation] by itself gives 
the right meaning, but that they all collectively do so. 

2. For neither drought nor wind nor sea nor dark- 
ness is the essential of Typhon, but the whole hurtful 
and destructive [element] which is in nature. 

3. For we must neither place the principles of the 
whole in soulless bodies, as [do] Democritus and Epi- 
curus, nor yet assume one Reason (Logos) [only] and 
one Providence that prevails over and masters all 
things as demiurge [or artificer] of quality-less matter, 
as [do] the Stoics. 

4, For it is impossible either that anything at all of 
no worth should exist where God is cause of all, or of 
worth where [He is cause] of nothing. 

5. For “reciprocal” [is] cosmos’ “ harmony, as that 
of lyre or bow,” according to Heracleitus,) and ac- 
cording to Euripides: 


There could not be apart good things and bad, 
But there’s a blend of both so as to make things fair.? 


6. Wherefore this exceedingly ancient doctrine also 
comes down from the theologers and law-givers to poets 
and philosophers—{a doctrine] that has its origin set 
down to no man’s name, and yet possessed of credit, 
strong and not so easy to efface, surviving in many 
places not in words or voices® only, but also in [secret] 


1 Mullach, i. 319; Fairbanks (45), p. 37. The whole logos of 
Heracleitus runs: “They know not how differing agrees with 
itself,—back-flying (wadfvrovos) harmony as though of lyre or 
bow.” That is, as a stretched string flies back again to its original 
position. 2 Nauck, p. 294, 

3 That is, presumably, “in logot and voices from heaven.” 


324 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


perfectionings and [public] offerings, both non-Greek 
and Greek [ones]—that neither does the universe mind- 
less and reason-less and guidance-less float in “That 
which acts of its own will,” nor is there one Reason 
[only] that rules and guides, as though with rudder as 
it were and bits obedient to the reins; but that [the 
universe] is many things and these a blend of evil 
things and good. 

7. Or, rather, seeing that Nature produces nothing, 
generally speaking, unmixed down here, it is not that 
from two jars a single mixer, like a tavern-keeper, 
pouring things out like drinks, mixes them up for us, 
but that from two opposite principles and two antago- 
nistic powers—the one leading [things] to the right 
and on the straight [road], the other upsetting and 
undoing [them]—both life has been made mixed, 
and cosmos (if not the whole, at anyrate this [cosmos] 
which surrounds the earth and comes after the Moon) 
irregular and variable, and susceptible of changes of 
every kind. 

8. For if nothing has been naturally brought into 
existence without a cause, and Good cannot furnish 
cause of Bad, the nature of Bad as well as Good must 
‘have a genesis and principle peculiar to itself. 

XLVI1 1, And this is the opinion of most of the 
most wise. 

2. For some think there are two craft-rival Gods, as 
it were,—one the artificer of good [things], the other of 
[things] worthless. Others call the better “God” and 
the other “ Daimon,” as Zoroaster the Mage, who, they 
tell us, lived five thousand years before the Trojan 
War. 


1 For a criticism and notes on this chapter and the following, 
see Cumont (F.), Textes et Monuments Figurés relatifs auz Mysteres 
de Mithra (Bruxelles, 1896), ii. 33-35. : 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 325 


3. Zoroaster, then, called the one Oromazés, and the 
other Areimanios, and further announced that the one 
resembled light especially of things sensible, and the 
other, contrariwise, darkness and ignorance, while that 
between the two was Mithrés; wherefore the Persians 
call Mithrés the Mediator. 

4. He taught them, moreover, to make offerings of 
gladsome prayers to the one, and to the other of 
melancholy de-precations. 

d. For bruising a certain plant called “moly”! ina 
mortar, they invoke Hades and Darkness; then mixing 
it with the blood of a wolf whose throat has been cut, 
they carry it away and cast it into a sunless spot. 

6. For they think that both of plants some are of 
the Good God and others of the Evil Daimon; and of 
animals, dogs, for instance, and birds? and hedgehogs 
of the Good, and water-rats of the Bad; wherefore 
they consider fortunate the man who kills the largest 
number [of the last]. 

XLVII. 1. Not that they also do not tell many mythic 
stories about the Gods; such as are, for example, the 
following : 

Oromazés, born from the purest light, and Areimanios, 
of the nether darkness, are at war with one another. 

2. And the former made six Gods: the first of good 
mind, the second of truth, the third of good order, and 
of the rest, one of wisdom, one of wealth, and the producer 
of things sweet following things fair; while the latter 
[made] craft-rivals as it were to those equal in number. 

3. Then Oromazés having tripled himself, removed 
himself from the sun so far as the sun is distant from 
the earth, and adorned the heaven with stars; and he 


1 Thought by some to be the Cappadocian equivalent of the 
haoma or soma plant. 
2 That is “ cocks.” 


326 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


established one star above all as warder and look-out, 
[namely] Sirius. 

4, And having made four-and-twenty other gods, he 
put them into an egg. 

Whereupon those that were made from Areimanios, 
just the same in number, piercing through the egg . . .! 
—whence the bad have been mingled with the good. 

5. But a time appointed by Fate will come when 
Areimanios’s letting loose of pestilence and famine 
must be utterly brought to an end, and made to vanish 
by these [good gods], and the earth becoming plane and 
level, there must ensue one mode of life and one way of 
government for men, all being happy and one-tongued.? 

6. Theopompus, however, says that, according to the 
Magi, for three thousand years alternately one of the 
Gods conquers and the other is conquered, and for yet 
another three thousand years they fight and war, and 
each undoes the work of the other. 

7. But that in the end Hades fails, and men shall be 
happy, neither requiring food nor casting shadow ;* 
while the God who has contrived these things is still 
and at rest for a time—not otherwise long for a God, 
but proportionate to a man’s sleeping. 

8. The style of myth among the Magi, then, is some- 
what after this manner. | 


1 A lacuna occurs here in the text. 

2 This may refer to the consciousness of the spiritual life. 

3 There are thus three thousand years in which Ahura Mazda 
has the upper hand, three thousand in which Ahriman is 
victorious, three thousand in which the forces are balanced, and 

in the tenth thousand years comes the Day of Light. Cf. Pastis 
Sophia, 243: “Jesus answered and said unto Mary: ‘A Day 
of Light is a thousand years in the world, so that thirty-six 
myriads of years and a half myriad of years of the world make a 
single Year of Light.’” The not casting of a shadow was supposed 
to be a characteristic of souls not attached to body; but it refers 
here rather to those who are “straight” with the Spiritual Sun. 


ee 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 327 


XLVIII. 1. Moreover, Chaldzans declare that of the 
planets—which they call birth-presiding gods—two are 
good workers, two ill-doers, while three are inter- 
mediates and common. 

2. As for the dogmas of the Greeks, they are, I take 
it, plain to all, ascribing as they do the good allotment 
to Olympian Zeus, and that which has to be averted to 
Hades. 

3. Moreover, they have a myth that Harmony is the 
child of Aphrodite and Ares, the latter of whom is 
harsh and strife-loving, while the former is gentle and 
a lover of love-striving. - 

4, For Heracleitus plainly calls “ War ”—“ father and 
king and lord of all,” and says that Homer, when he 
prays “ that strife and hatred cease from gods as well,” ® 
forgets that he is imprecating the means of birth of 
all, in that they have their genesis from conflict and 
antipathy ; that: 


“Sun will not o’erstep his proper bounds, for if he do, 
Furies, Right’s bodyguard, will find him out.” 


5. The Pythagorics [also], in a list of names, set 
down the predicates of Good as—One, Finite, Abiding, 
Straight, Odd, Square, Equal, Right, Light; and of 
Bad as—Two, Infinite, Moving, Curved, Even, Oblong, 
Unequal, Left, Dark,—on the ground that these are the 
underlying principles of genesis. 

6. Aristotle [also predicates] the former as Form and 
the latter as Privation. 

7. While Plato, though in many passages disguising 
himself and hiding his face, calls the former of the 
opposite principles Same and the latter Other. 


1 Fairbanks, (44) pp. 34, 35. 
2 Of. Il., xviii. 107; Fairbanks, (43) pp. 34, 35. 
3 Fairbanks, (29) pp. 32, 33. 


328 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


8. But in his Laws, being now older, no longer in 
riddles and in symbols, but with authentic names, he 
says! cosmos is moved not by one soul, but probably 
by several, in any case not less than two,—whereof the 
one is good-doing, the other the opposite to this and © 
maker of things opposite. 

9. He leaves out, however, a certain third inter- 
mediate nature, neither soul-less nor reason-less nor 
motion-less of itself, as some think,? but depending on 
both of them, and for ever longing for and desiring and 
following after the better, as the following [passages] 
of the argument (/ogos),? combining as it does for the 
most part the theology of the Egyptians with their 
philosophy, show. 

XLIX. 1. For though the genesis and composition of 
this cosmos has been blended from opposing, though 
not equal-strengthed, powers, the lordship is neverthe- 
less that of the Better [one]. 

2. Still it is impossible the Worse should be stiely 
destroyed, as it is largely innate in the body and largely 
in the soul of the universe, and ever in desperate 
conflict with the Better. 

3. In the Soul [of cosmos], then, Mind and Reason 
(Logos), the guide and lord of all the best in it, is 
Osiris; and so in earth and air and water and heaven 
and stars, that which is ordered and appointed and in 
health, is the efflux of Osiris, reflected in seasons and 
temperatures and periods. 

4, But Typhon is the passionate and titanic and 
reasonless and impulsive [aspect] of the Soul, while of 


1 This is a very brief summary of the argument in Legg., x 
896 ff. (Jowett, v. 282 ff.). 

2 Of. xlv. 6. 

3 This “argument” is Plutarch’s own treatise and not Plato’s 
dialogue, as King supposes. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 329 


its corporeal [side he is] the death-dealing and 
pestilent and disturbing, with unseasonable times and 
intemperate atmospheres and concealments of sun and 
moon,—as though they were the charges and oblitera- 
tions of Typhon. 

5. And the name is a predicate of Séth, as they call 
Typhon ; for [Séth] means “that which oppresses and 
constrains by force;”1 it means also, frequently, 
“turning upside down,” and, again, “ overleaping.” 

6. Some, moreover, say that one of the companions 
of Typhon was Bebon;? while Manethds [says] that 
Typhon himself was also called Bebon, and that the 
name signifies “holding back” or “hindering,” since 
the power of Typhon stands in the way of things 
going on their way and moving towards what they 
have to. 

L. 1. Wherefore also of domestic animals they ap- 
portion to him the least tractable—the ass; while 
of wild ones, the most savage-—the exvoodilé and 
hippopotamus. 

2. As to the ass, we have already given some ex- 
planation. At Hermes-city, however, as image of 
Typhon, they show us a hippopotamus on which stands 
a hawk? fighting a snake,—indicating by the hippo- 
potamus Typhon, and by the hawk power and rule, of 
which Typhon frequently possessing himself by force, 
ceases not from being himself in and throwing [others] 
into a state of disorder by means of evil. 

3. Wherefore also when they make offerings on the 
seventh of the month Tybi‘—which [day] they call 


1 Of. xii. 2. 

? BéBwva, but perhaps rather BeBava—and so BeBas, a play on 
BeBay, “steadying” or “straining.” In Eg. Bebi or Baba; gf. 
Budge, op. cit., ii. 92. 

3 Of. li. 2. * Copt. Tobi—corr. roughly to January. 


330 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“ Arrival of Isis from Phoenicia,” they mould on the 
cakes a bound hippopotamus.! 

4, And at Apollo-city it is the custom for absolutely 
everyone to eat a piece of crocodile. And on one 
[particular] day they hunt down and kill as many [of 
them] as they possibly can, and throw them down 
right in front of the temple, saying that Typhon 
escaped Horus by turning himself into a crocodile,— 
considering as they do that all animals and plants and 
experiences that are evil and harmful are Typhon’s 
works and parts and movements. 

LI. 1. Osiris, again, on the other hand, they write 
with “eye” and “sceptre,”2 the former of which [they 
say] shows his providence, and the latter his power ; 
just as Homer, when calling him who is ruler and king 
of all “ Zeus supreme counsellor,”* seems by “supreme” 
to signify his supremacy, and by “counsellor” his good 
counsel and providence. 

2. They frequently write this god with “hawk” * as 
well; for it excels in tension of sight and swiftness of 
flight, and can naturally support itself on the smallest 
quantity of food. 

3. It is said, moreover, to hover over the bodies of — 
the unburied dead and to cast earth upon them. And 
when it drops down on the river to drink, it sets its 
wings upright, and after drinking it lowers them again, 
—by which it is evident it saves itself and escapes 
from the crocodile, for if it is caught its wings remain 
fixed as they were set.® 


1 Of. “bound ass” above, xxx. 3. 

2 Cf. x. 6. 

3 Il, viii. 22; xvii. 339. 

4 Cf. 1.2. Compare the Eagle of Zeus. 

5 More of the “ Physiologus.” 

6 “In the crocodile’s gullet,” comments King, “and so pre- 
vents him gulping down the bird.” We are, however, inclined 


ea 


a oe 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 331 


4, And everywhere they exhibit a man-shaped image 
of Osiris,—ithyphallic, because of his generative and 
luxuriant [nature]. 

And they dress his statue in a flame-coloured robe, 
—since they consider the sun as body of the power of 
the Good, as it were a visible [sign] of an essence that 
mind only can conceive. 

5. Wherefore also we should pay no attention to 
those who assign the sphere of the sun to Typhon,1—to 
whom nothing light or salutary, neither order nor 
genesis, nor any motion that has measure and reason, 
belongs, but [rather] their contraries. 

6. And we should not set down drought which 
destroys many of the animals and plants, as the sun’s 
work, but [rather as that] of the breaths and waters 
in earth and air not being seasonably blended when 
the principle of disorderly and unbounded power makes 
discord and quenches the exhalations. 

LII. 1. And in the sacred hymns to Osiris, they in- 
voke bim who is hidden in the Arms of the Sun;? and 
on the thirteenth of the month of Epiphi*® they keep 
with feast the Birthday of the Eye of Horus, when moon 
and sun are in the same straight line; as they think 
that not only the moon but also the sun is eye and light 
of Horus. 

2, And on the eighth of the waning [half] of Padphi* 
they keep the Birthday of the Sun’s Staff, after the 
autumnal equinox,—signifying that he needs an under- 
prop, as it were, and strengthening, deficient as he is 


to think that Plutarch is a bit of a humourist, and that there is 
no necessity for commenting seriously on his on dits. 

1 Cf. xli. 1; also § 9 below. 

2 That is the Sun’s Rays. 

3 Copt. Epep—corr. roughly with July. 

* Copt. Paopi—corr. roughly with October. 


$32 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


in heat and light, declining and moving obliquely 
from us. 


3. Moreover, just after the winter solstice they carry 
the Cow round the shrine [seven times], and the circuit 
is called the Seeking for Osiris, as in winter the 
Goddess longs for the “ water ” of the Sun. 

4, And she goes round this number of times, because 
he completes his passing from the winter to the summer 
solstice in the seventh month. 

5. Moreover, Horus, son of Osiris, is said to have 
been the first of all to make offerings to the Sun on the 
fourth of the waxing moon, as is written in the [books] 
entitled Birthdays of Horus. 

6. Though indeed every day they offer incense to 
the Sun in three kinds—resin at his rising, myrrh at 
mid-heaven, and what is called “ kuphi” at his setting ; 
the reason for each of which I will explain later on.! 
And with all these they think to make the Sun pro- 
pitious to them and to do him service. 

7. But what need is there to collect many such 
indications? For there are those who say point-blank 
that Osiris is Sun and is called Sirius by Greeks—though 
with Egyptians the addition of the article has caused 
the name to be mistaken ?—and who declare Isis to be no 
other than Moon; whence also [they say] that the horned 
ones of her statues are representations of her crescent, 
while by the black-robed ones are signified the occulta- 
tions and overshadowings in which she follows Sun 
longing after him. 

8. Accordingly they invoke Moon for affairs of love; 
and Eudoxus ° says that Isis decides love-affairs. 


} Of. \xxix., Ixxx. 

2 That is 6 cefpios=Sorpis—an absurd contention, of course, 
though flattering to Greek vanity. 

8 Of. vi., X., 2Xx., lxii, lxiv. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 3383 


9. And these [explanations] have in a modified way 
some share of plausibility; whereas it is not worth 
while even listening to those who make the Sun Typhon. 

10. But let us ourselves again take up the proper 
reason (logos). 


The PROPER REASON ACCORDING TO PLUTARCH 


LIII. 1. For Isis is the feminine [principle] of Nature 
and that which is capable of receiving the whole of 
genesis; in virtue of which she has been called “ Nurse” 
and “ All-receiving” by Plato, and, by the multitude, 
“She of ten-thousand names,” through her being 
transformed by Reason (Logos) and receiving all forms 
and ideas [or shapes]. 

2. And she hath an innate love of the First and 
Most Holy of all things (which is identical with the 
Good), and longs after and pursues it. But she flees 
from and repels the domain of the Bad, and though she 
is the field and matter of them both, yet doth she ever 
incline to the Better of herself, and offers [herself] for 
him to beget and sow into herself emanations and 
likenesses, with which she joys and delights that she is 
pregnant and big with their generations. 

3. For Generation is image of Essence in Matter and 
Becoming copy of Being. 

LIV. 1. Hence not unreasonably do they say in the ~ 
myth that [while] the Soul of Osiris is eternal and 
indestructible, Typhon often tears his Body in pieces 
and makes it disappear, and that Isis seeks it wandering 
and puts it together again. 

2. For the Real and Conceivable-by-the-mind-alone 
and Good is superior to destruction and change; but 
the images which the sensible and corporeal imitates 


1 Timeeus, 51 A, 


334 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


from it, and the reasons (/ogoz) and forms and likenesses 
which it receives, just as seal-impressions in wax, do 
not last for ever, but are seized upon by the disorderly 
and turbulent [elements], expelled hither from the field 
above, and fighting against the Horus whom Isis brings 
forth as the sensible image of that cosmos which mind 
alone can conceive. 

3. Wherefore also [Horus] is said to have a charge 
of bastardy brought against him by Typhon—of not 
being pure and unalloyed like his sire, Reason (Logos), 
itself by itself, unmixed and impassible, but bastardized 
with matter on account of the corporeal [element]. 

4. Nevertheless, Horus gets the best of it and wins, 
through Hermes—that is, the Reason (Logos) *—bearing 
witness and showing that Nature reflects the [true] 
Cosmos by changing her forms according to That-which- 
mind-alone-can-conceive.® 

5. For the genesis of Apollo* from Isis and Osiris ® 
that took place while the Gods were still in the womb 
of Rhea, is an enigmatical way of stating that before this 
[sensible] cosmos became manifest, and Matter was 
perfected by Reason (Logos), Nature, proving herself 
imperfect, of herself brought forth her first birth. 

6. Wherefore also they say that that God was lame® 
in the dark, and call him Elder Horus; for he was not 
cosmos, but a sort of image and phantasm of the world 
which was to be.’ 


1 Of. C. H., x. (xi.) 10; Lact., iv. 6 (Frag. v.). 

2 This shows that in one tradition Hermes and Osiris were 
identified. 

3 Cf. xix. 4. # Sc, Horus. 

5 The sequel I think shows that “and Osiris” is a gloss ; but see 
xii. 8. 

6 Of. 1xii. 

7 These two paragraphs are, in my opinion, of the utmost value 
for the critical investigation of the sources of the famous Sophia- 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 335 


LV. 1. But this Horus [of ours] is their Son,! 
horizoned ? and perfect, who has not destroyed Typhon 
utterly, but has brought over to his side his efficacy 
and strength; hence they say it is that the statue 
of Horus at Coptos grasps in one hand Typhon’s 
virilia. 

2. Moreover, they have a myth that Hermes cut out 
the sinews of Typhon and used them for lyre strings,— 
[thus] teaching [us] how Reason (Logos) brought the 
universe into harmony, and made it concordant out of 
discordant elements. He did not destroy the destruc- 
tive power but lamed it. 

3. Hence while weak and ineffective up there, down 
here, by being blinded and interwoven with the passible 
and changeable elements, it is cause of shakings and 
tremors in earth, of droughts and tempests in air, and 
again of lightnings and thunderings. 

4, Moreover, it infects waters and winds with pesti- 
lences, and shoots up and rears itself as far as the 
moon, frequently blurring and blackening its light, as 
Egyptians think. 


mythus of Gnosticism. The imperfect birth (Abortion) of the 
Sophia (Wisdom, Nature, Isis), as the result of her effort to bring 
forth of herself, without her consort, or syzygy, while still in the 
Plér6ma (Womb of Rhea), paves the way for the whole scheme 
of one of the main forms of Gnostic cosmology and subsequent 
soteriology, the Creator Logos and Saviour having to perfect 
the imperfect product of Nature. This is, I believe, the first 
time that the above passage of Plutarch has been brought into 
connection with the Sophia-mythus, and all previous trans- 
lations with which I am acquainted accordingly make havoc of 
the meaning. See F. F. F., pp. 339 ff.; and for the Pauline use 
of the technical term “Abortion,” D. J. L., pp. 355 ff.; for 
“Balaam the Lame Man” (? a by-name for Jeschu-Horus), see 
abid., p, 201. Reitzenstein (pp. 39, 40) quotes these two chapters, 
and adds some parallels from the Trismegistic literature. 

1 Adopting the suggestion of Bernardakis—é vids for adrés, 

2 Or “defined,” épicudvos—a play on pos, 


336 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


5. And they say that Typhon at one time strikes 
the Eye of Horus, and at another takes it out and 
swallows it. By “striking” they refer enigmatically 
to the monthly diminution of the moon, and by 
“blinding” to its eclipse, which the sun remedies by 
immediately shining on it after it has passed out of the 
shadow of the earth. 

LVI. 1. Now the better and diviner Nature is from 
these :—{to wit] the Intelligible and Matter, and that 
from them which Greeks call Cosmos. 

2. Plato,? indeed, was wont to call the Intelligible 
Idea and Model and Father; and Matter Mother and 
Nurse—both place and ground of Genesis; and the 
offspring of both Genesis. 

3. And one might conjecture that Egyptians [also 
revered *] the fairest of the triangles, likening the 
nature of the universe especially to this; for Plato 
also, in his Republics seems to have made additional 
use of this in drawing up his marriage scheme. 

4, And this triangle has its perpendicular [side] of 
“three,” its base of “four,” and its hypotenuse of 
“five”; its square being equal to the [sum of the] 
squares on the containing sides.® 

5. We must, accordingly, compare its perpendicular 
to male, its base to female, and its hypotenuse to the 
offspring of both ; and [conjecture] Osiris as source, 
Isis as receptacle, and Horus as result. 


1 All this according to the Mathematici, presumably; the 
“eye” of Horus would rather signify “ mentality.” 

2 Timeus, 500. - : 

3 There is a lacuna in the text. 

4 Rep., 545D ff. See also Adam (J.), The Nuptial Number of 
Plato: its Solution and Significance (London, 1891). 

5 That is to say, that in Plutarch’s opinion Plaig,gerived the 
idea originally from Egypt. 2 add 

6 That is, 9+16=25, 


\ jhe Saeed ne a a a ee 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 337 


6. For the “ three” is the first “odd” + and perfect ; ? 
while the “four” [is] square from side “even” two ;? 
and the “five” resembles partly its father and partly 
its mother, being composed of “three” and “ two,” 

7. And panta [all] is only a slight variant of pente 
[five]; and they call counting pempasasthai [reckoning 
by fives]. 

8. And five makes a square equal to the number of 
letters among Egyptians,‘ and a period of as many years 
as the Apis lives. 


9, Thus they usually call Horus also Min 5—that is, 
“being seen”; for cosmos is a sensible and see-able 
thing. 

10. And Isis is sometimes called Muth,® and again 
Athyri? and Methyer. And by the first of the names 
they mean “ Mother”; by the second, “ Cosmic House” 
of Horus,—as also Plato [calls her] “ Ground of Genesis ” 
and “ She who receives”; and the third is compounded 
from “Full” and “Cause,”—for Matter is full of 


1 “One” being reckoned neither odd nor eyen. 

2 That is, divisible by itself and “one” only. 

3 rerpdywvos awd mrcupas dptlov ris Suddos. 

4 That is, the Egyptian alphabet consisted of 25 letters. 

5 In the Ritual (chap. xvii. 30), the deceased is made to say: 
“JT am the God Amsu (or Min) in his coming forth; may his 
two plumes be set upon my head for me.” And in answer to 
the question : “ Who, then, is this?”—the text goes on to say: 
“ Amsu is Horus, the avenger of his father, and his coming 
forth is his birth. The plumes upon his head are Isis and 
Nephthys when they go forth to set themselves there, even as 
his protectors, and they provide that which his head lacketh ; 
or (as others say), they are the two exceeding great uraei which are 
upon the head of their father Tem, or (as others say), his two 
eyes are the two plumes which are upon his head.” (Budge, op, 
cit., ii. 258.) : 

6 Eg. Mut, the syzygy of Amen, Mut means “Mother”; she 
was the World-mother. See Budge, op. cit., ii. 28 ff. 

7 Of. lxix. 4, “ Athyr” probably meaning Hathor. 

VOL. I. 22 


338 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Cosmos, and consorts with the Good and Pure and 
Ordered. 

LVII. 1. And Hesiod! also, when he makes all the 
first [elements to be] Chaos and Earth and Tartarus and 
Love, might be thought to assume no other principles 
than these,—if at anyrate in substituting the names we 
assign to Isis that of Earth, to Osiris that of Love, and 
to Typhon that of Tartarus; for his Chaos seems to be 
subsumed as ground and place of the universe. 

2. Our data also in a way invite as witness Plato’s 
myth which Socrates details in the Symposium? about 
the Birth of Love,—telling [us how] that Poverty wanting 
children lay down by the side of sleeping Means, and 
conceiving by him brought forth Love of a mixed nature 
and capable of assuming every shape, in as much, in- 
deed, as he is the offspring of a good and wise father 
and one sufficient for all, but of an incapable mother 
and one without means,’ who on account of her need is 
ever clinging to some one else and importuning some 
one else.* 

3. For his Means is no other than the First Beloved 
and Desirable and Perfect and Sufficient ; and he calls 
Matter Poverty,—who is herself of herself deficient of 
the Good, but is ever being filled by Him and longing 
for and sharing in [Him]. 

4, And the Cosmos, that is Horus, is born from these ; 
and Horus, though neither eternal nor impassible nor 
indestructible, but ever-generable, continues by means 
of the changes and periods of his passions to remain ever 
young and ever to escape destruction. 

LVIII. 1. Now, we should make use of the myths not 


1 Theog., 116-122. 

2 Symp., 2038 ; Jowett, i. 573 ff. 
3 &xépov—a play on mépos. 

4 Of. lviii. 6, last clause. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 339 


as though they were altogether sacred sermons (logo7), 
but taking the serviceable [element] of each according 
to its similitude [to reason]. 

2. When, then, we say Matter, we should not be 
swept into the opinions of some philosophers, and 
suppose some body or other of itself soul-less and 
quality-less, and inert and inefficient; for we call oil 
the “ matter” of a perfume, [and] gold that of a statue, 
though they are not destitute of every quality. 

3. [Nay,] we submit the soul itself and [even] the 
thought of man as the “matter” of knowledge and 
virtue to the reason (logos) to order and bring into 
rhythm. 

4. Moreover, some have declared the mind [to be] 
“region of ideas,’ and, as it were, the “impressionable 
substance ! of the intelligibles.” 

5, And some think that the substance of the woman? 
is neither power nor source, but matter and nutriment 
of birth. ; 

6. If, then, we attach ourselves to these, we ought 
thus also to think of this Goddess as having eternally 
her share in the First God, and consorting [with Him] 
for love of the goodness and beauty that surround Him, 
never opposed to Him, but, just as we say that a lawful 
and righteous husband loves [his wife] righteously, and 
a good wife though she has her husband and consorts 
with him, still desires [him], so [should we] think of 
Her as clinging to Him, and importuning Him,’ though 
[ever] filled full with His supremest and purest parts. 

LIX. 1. But where Typhon steals in, laying hold of 
the last [parts, we should think of Her as] then seeming 
to wear a melancholy countenance, and being said to 


1 éxuaryeiov, Cf. Plat., Tim., 500 ; Theet., 191 0, 196 4. 
2 7d orépua Tis yuvaixds—lit., “ the seed of the woman.” 
8 Of. lvii. 2. 


340 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


mourn, and to be seeking after certain relics and frag- 
ments of Osiris, and enfolding them in her robes, 
receiving them when destroyed into herself, and 
hiding them away, just as She also produces them 
again when they are born, and sends them forth 
from herself. 

2. For while the reasons (logot) and ideas and 
emanations of the God in heaven and stars remain [for 
ever], those that are disseminated into things passible— 
in earth and sea and plants and animals — being 
dissolved and destroyed and buried, come to light over 
and over again and reappear in their births. 

3. For which cause the myth says that Typhon lived 
with Nephthys, but that Osiris had knowledge of her 
secretly. 

4, For the last parts of Matter, which they call 
Nephthys and End, are mainly in possession of the 
destructive power ; nevertheless the Generative and 
Saving One distributes into them weak and faint seed 
which is destroyed by Typhon, except so much as 
Isis by adoption saves and nourishes and compacts 
together. 

LX. 1. But He is on the whole the Better one, as 
both Plato and Aristotle suppose; and the generative 
and moving [power] of Nature moves to Him and towards 
being, while the annihilating and destructive [moves] 
from Him and towards non-being. 

2. Wherefore they derive the name Isis from hastening 
(fecOar) and coursing with knowledge, since she is 
ensouled and prudent motion. 

3. For her name is not foreign ;+ but a as all the 
Gods have a common name from two elements—“ that 

which can be seen” and “that which runs”*—so we 


1 That is, non-Greek—fapBapixdy. Of, ii. 2. 
2 The word-play being 0¢bs—@eards—Oéor, 


enn a eer 


EPRI Oe 


Sets 


eee 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 341 


call this Goddess “Isis” from “ knowledge,”! and 
Egyptians [also] call her Isis.” 

4, And thus Plato also says the ancients signified the 
“Holy* [Lady]” by calling her “Isia,’—and so also 
“Mental Perception” and “Prudence,” in as much as 
she is [the very] course and motion of Mind hastening * 
and coursing, and that they placed Understanding—in 
short, the Good and Virtue—in things that flow® and 
run. 

5. Just as [he says] again, the Bad is railed at with 
corresponding names, when they call that which hinders 
nature and binds it up and holds it and prevents it 
from hastening and going, “ badness,”® “difficulty,”” 
“ cowardice ” ® [and] “ distress.” 

LXI. 1. And Osiris has had his name from a combina- 
tion of datos (holy) and (fepds (sacred); for there is a 
common Reason (Logos) of things in Heaven and of 
things in Hades,—the former of which the ancients were 
accustomed to call sacred, and the latter holy. 

2. And the Reason that [both] brings [down] to light 
the heavenly things and is [also] of things that are 


1 Of. ii. 3 for the word-play, and also for dota in the next 
paragraph. 
_? They, however, probably called her something resembling 
Ast. 

3 hy do1dv—but Plutarch is mistaken, for in Cratylus, 401¢ 
it is a question of oderdy and éordy and not of doidv and iotay. 

4 ieudvov, picking up the teo@a above in paragraph 2. 

5 Of. Crat., 415 D, where the word-play is d&perh and det-perrh 
(ever-flowing). 

8 Of. Crat., 415 c—where the play is xax-la=Kaxés iby (tévar)— 
badly going. j 

7 &mop-ta—the word-play being 4 (not) and xop-ever@a: (going) 
—ibid., ©, D. 

8 “Se:ala signifies that the soul is bound with a strong chain 
(Securs), for Alay means strength, and therefore Se:Afa expresses 
the greatest and strongest bond of the soul” (zbid.). See Jowett, 
i. 359 f. 


342 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


mounting upwards,! is called Anubis, and sometimes 
also Hermanubis,? belonging in his former capacity to 
things above and in his latter to things below [them]. 

3. Wherefore also they offer him in his former capacity 
a white cock,’ and in his latter a saffron-coloured one, 
—thinking that the former things are pure and the 
latter mixed and manifold. 

4, Nor ought we to be surprised at the manipula- 
tion of the names back into Greek For tens of 
thousands of others that disappeared with those who 
emigrated from Greece, continue unto this day and 
sojourn with foreigners; for recalling some of which 
they blame the poets’ art as “barbarising,’—I mean 
those who call such words “ glosses.” ® 

5. Further, they relate that in what are called the 
“Books of Hermes,” it is written that they call the 
Power that rules the ordained revolution of the Sun, 
Horus, while the Greeks [call it] Apollo; and the Power 
that rules the Breath [or Spirit], some [call] Osiris, 
others Sarapis, and others Sdthis in Egyptian. 

6. The last means “conception” (kiyow) or “con- 
ceiving” (ro xvew).6 Wherefore also, by inversion of 
the name, the star [Sothis] which they consider the 
special one of Isis, is called Dog (xdwy) in Greek. 

7. We should, however, least of all be jealous about 
the names; still if we were, I would sooner give up 


1 That is, things in Hades (the Invisible)—not Tartarus. 
_ ® Horus was endowed with many characteristics of other gods. 
Thus with Anpu or Anubis he becomes Heru-em-Anpu, i.e. 
Horus as Anubis, and is said to dwell in the “divine hall.” This 
is the Hermanubis of Plutarch. Of. Budge, op. cit., i. 493. 

3 “A cock to Aisculapius.” 

* Of. xxix. 8. 

5 yAérras—a technical term for obsolete or foreign words that 
need explanation. 

6 Of. xxi. 2. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 343 


“Sarapis” than “Osiris”; for though I think the 
former is a foreign one and the latter Greek, yet are 
they both [names] of One God and One Power. 

LXII. 1. The Egyptian [names] also resemble these 
[Greek ones]. For they often call Isis by the name 
of Athena, which expresses some such meaning as “I 
have come from myself”—which is [again] indicative 
of self-motive course. 

2. While “Typhon,” as has been said,! is called Séth 
and Bebén and Smu,—the names being intended to 
signify a certain forcible and preventative checking, 
opposition or reversing. 

3. Moreover, they call the loadstone “Bone of 
Horus,”? and iron “[Bone] of Typhon,’ as Manethés 
relates; for just as iron often resembles that which 
is attracted to and follows after the loadstone, and often 
is turned away from it, and repelled to an opposite 
direction, so the saving and good. and reason-possessing 
motion of the Cosmos both turns towards itself and 
makes more gentle by persuasion that harsh and 
typhonean [motion]; and then again after raising it into 
itself, it reverses it and plunges it into the infinitude. 

4, Moreover, Eudoxus® says that the Egyptians tell 
a myth about Zeus that, as in consequence of his having 
his legs grown together, he could not walk, for shame 
he lived in solitude; and so Isis, by cutting in two 
and separating these limbs of his body, made his going 
even-footed.® 

5. By those things, moreover, the myth enigmatically 

1 Of. xli., xlix. (end). 

2 Of. the “ bone of the sea-hawk” in Hipp., Philo., v. 9 and 17 ; 
and note to J., in “ Myth of Man in the Mysteries,” p. 189. 

3 Of. xxx., lxix., e al. 

4 The invisible serpent-form of the God. 


5 Of. Plat., Tim., 44D and 45. ; and liv. 5 above concerning 
the birth of the Elder Horus. 


344 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


hints that the Mind and Reason (Logos) of God after it 
had progressed! in itself in the invisible and unmani- 
fest, came forth into genesis by means of motion. 


THE SYMBOLISM OF THE SISTRUM 


LXIII. 1. The sistrum (ceicrpov) also shows that 
existent things must be shaken up (ceieoOar) and never 
have cessation from impulse, but as it were be wakened 
up and agitated when they fall asleep and die away. 

2. For they say they turn aside and beat off Typhon 
with sistra,— signifying that when corruption binds 
nature fast and brings her to a stand, [then] generation 
frees her and raises her from death by means of motion. 

3. Now the sistrum has a curved top, and its arch 
contains the four [things] that are shaken. For the 
part of the cosmos which is subject to generation and 
corruption, is circumscribed by the sphere of the moon, 
and all [things] in it are moved and changed by the 
four elements—fire and earth and water and air. 

4, And on the arch of the sistrum, at the top, they 
put the metal figure of a cat with a human face, and at 
the bottom, below the shaken things, the face some- 
times of Isis and sometimes of Nephthys,—symbolis- 
ing by the faces generation and consummation (for 
these are the changes and motions of the elements), and 
by the cat the moon, on account of the variable nature, 
night habits, and fecundity of the beast. 


1 Or “walked,” suggesting some idea of single motion in itself 
—the motion of “sameness,” symbolised by a serpent with its 
tail in its mouth. The serpent was one of the most favourite 
symbols of the Logos, and this perhaps accounts for the “legs 

grown together.” 
_ 2 7d woniaov, King translates this “pied colour,” and deduces 
that “the original colour of the cat was tabby”; but, as the 
school-boy says, I don’t see it. 


eS i 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 345 


5. For it is fabled to bring forth one, then two, and 
[then] three, and four, and five [at a birth], and then 


’ adds one by one until seven ;' so that in all she brings 


forth eight-and-twenty, the number of lights of the 
moon, 

6. This, however, is probably somewhat too mythical ; 
anyway, the pupils of its eyes seem to become full 
and dilate at the full-moon, and to contract and shut 
out the light during the wanings of that luminary. 

7. And by the human face of the cat is signified the 
intellectual and reasonable nature of the changes that 
take place in connection with the moon. 


THE TRUE “ LoGos,” AGAIN, ACCORDING To PLUTARCH 


LXIV. 1. But, to speak concisely, it is not correct to 
consider either water or sun or earth or heaven as Osiris 
or Isis, or, again, fire or drought or sea as Typhon; but 
if we were to assign simply that [nature] to the latter 
which is not subject to measure or rule owing to excesses 
or insufficiencies, and should reverence and honour 
that which has been subjected to order and is good 
and beneficent, as the work of Isis, and the image 
and copy and reason of Osiris, we should not miss the 
mark, 

2. Moreover, we shall make Eudoxus? cease to dis- 
believe and be perplexed, how it is neither Demeter 
who has charge of love-affairs but Isis, nor Dionysus 
who has the power either to make the Nile increase or 
to rule over the dead [but Osiris]. 


1 More “ Physiologus” ; or rather, there was a mystical theory 
about other things which was adapted to a popular natural 
history of the cat, and then the fable was cited as “proof” of the 
original theory. 

2 Of. Ixii. e al. 


346 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


3. For we think that by one Common Reason (Logos) ! 
these Gods have been ordained over every domain of good; 
and every fair and good thing possible for nature owes 
its origin to their means,—[Osiris] giving [them] their 
origins and [Isis] receiving and distributing [them]. 


AGAINST THE WEATHER AND VEGETATION GoD 
THEORIES 


LXV. 1. And we shall also get our hands on the dull 
crowd who take pleasure in associating the [mystic 
recitals] about these Gods either with changes of the 
atmosphere according to the seasons, or with the genera- 
tion of the corn and sowings and ploughings, and in 
saying that Osiris is buried when the sown corn is 
hidden by the earth, and comes to life and shows 
himself again when it begins to sprout. 

2. For which cause also [they declare] that Isis, on 
feeling she is pregnant, ties an amulet round her [neck] 
on the sixth day of the first half of the month Phadphi ;? 
and that Harpocrates is brought forth about the winter 
solstice imperfect and infant in the things that sprout 
too early.® 

3. For which cause they offer him first-fruits of 
growing lentils, and they keep the days of thanks for 
safe delivery after the spring equinox. 

4. For they love to hear these things and believe 
them, drawing conviction from things immediately at 
hand and customary. 

LXVI. 1. Still there is nothing to complain of if 


1 Parallel to “ Common Sense.” 

2 Copt. Paopi—corr. roughly with October. 

3 Cf. Ixviii, 2, 3. Heru-p-Khart, Horus the Younger, or the 
“Child,” so called to distinguish him from Heru-ur, or Horus- 
the Elder. Gf. Budge, op. cit., i. 468 f. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 347 


[only], in the first place, they cherish the Gods in common 
with ourselves, and do not make them peculiar to Egyp- 
tians, either by characterising Nile and only the land 
that Nile waters by these names, or, by saying that 
marshes and lotuses and god-making [are their mono- 
poly], deprive the rest of mankind who have no Nile 
or Buté or Memphis, of [the] Great Gods. 

2. Indeed, all [men] have Isis and know her and the 
Gods of her company ; for though they learned not long 
ago to call some of them by names known among the 
Egyptians, still they knew and honoured the power of 
each [of them] from the beginning. 

3. In the second place, and what is more important— 
they should take very good heed and be apprehensive lest 
unwittingly they write-off the sacred mysteries and 
dissolve them into winds and streams, and sowing and 
ploughings, and passions of earth and changes of seasons. 

4. As those who [say] that Dionysus is wine and 
Hepheestus flame, and Persephone, as Cleanthes says 
somewhere, the wind that drives through the crops and 
is killed ; and [as] some poet says of the reapers : 


Then when they, lusty, cut Demeter’s limbs." 


5. For these in nothing differ from those who regard 
a pilot as sails and ropes and anchor, and a weaver as 
yarns and threads, and a physician as potions and 
honey-brew and barley-water; nay, they put into men’s 
minds dangerous and atheistic notions, by transferring 
names of Gods to natures and to things that have no 
sense or soul, and which are necessarily destroyed by 
men according to their need and use. For it is not 
possible to consider such things in themselves as Gods. 

LXVII. 1. For a God is not a thing without a mind 
or soul, or one made subject to the hand of man ; but it 


1 Of. Ps. Plut., De Vita Homeri, § 23. 


348 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


is from these things that we deduce that those who 
bestow them on us for our use and offer them [to us] in 
perpetual abundance, are Gods. 

2. Not different [Gods] for different peoples, not 
non-Greek and Greek, not southern and northern 
[Gods]; but just as sun and moon and earth and sea 
[are] common to all [men], though they are called by 
different names by different peoples, so of the Reason 
(Logos) that orders all things, and of one Providence 
that also directs powers ordained to serve under her for 
all [purposes], have different honours and titles been 
made according to their laws by different [nations]. 

3. And there are consecrated symbols, some obscure 
ones and others more plain, guiding the intelligence 
towards the mysteries of the Gods, [though] not without 
risk. 

4. For some going entirely astray have stepped into 
superstitions, while others, shunning superstition as a 
quagmire, have unwittingly fallen into atheism! as 
down a precipice. 

LXVIIL. 1. Wherefore especially with regard to such 
things, should we, taking with us Reason (Logos) as our 
mystic guide out of philosophy, reverently meditate 
upon each of the things said and done; in order that, 
[we may avoid what] Theodorus said, [namely] that 
when he offered his words with his right hand some of 
his hearers took them with their left,—and so not miss 
the mark by taking in another sense what laws on 
offerings and feasts have well ordained. 

2. For that all [these things] must be referred to the 
Reason (Logos), we may learn from themselves also. 

For on the nineteenth of the first month,? when they 


1 King again, erroneously in my opinion, refers this to the 
Christians. 
2 Copt. Thoth—corr. roughly with September. 


SS es 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 349 


keep a feast to Hermes, they eat honey and figs, saying 
when so doing, “Truth is sweet.” And the amulet. of 
Isis which the myth says she put round her [neck]? is, 
when interpreted, “True Voice.” 

3. And we should not consider Harpocrates either 
as an imperfect or infant god, or a [god] of pulse,? but 
as protector and chastener of the babyish and imperfect 
and inarticulate reason that men have about Gods. For 
which cause he has his finger laid upon his lips as a 
symbol of reticence and silence. 

4, And in the month of Mesoré* when they make 
offerings of pulse, they say: “Tongue [is] fortune ; 
tongue is daimon.” 

5, And they say that of the trees in Egypt the persea 
especially has been made sacred to the Goddess, because 
its fruit resembles a heart and its leaf a tongue. 

6. For of all man’s natural possessions nothing is 
more godlike than Jogos [word or reason], and especially 
that concerning the Gods, nor is there anything that 
decides more weightily for happiness. 

7. Wherefore we commend him who goes down to 


- consult the Oracle here* to think religiously and speak 


reverently. But the many act ridiculously when, after 
they have in the processions and feasts made proclama- 
tion to speak reverently, they subsequently speak and 
think the most irreverent things about the Gods 
themselves, 

LXIX. 1. What use, then, must one make of those 
melancholy and laughterless and mournful sacrifices, if 
it is not right either to omit the rites of custom, or to 
confound our views about Gods and throw them into 
confusion with absurd suspicions ? 


1 Of. ixv. 2. 2 Cf. wbid., 3. 
8 Copt. Mesdré—corr. roughly with August. 
4 Sc. at Delphi. 


350 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


2. Yea, among Greeks, too, many things are done, 
just about the same time also, similar to those which 
Egyptians perform in the sacred [rites]. 

3. For instance, at Athens, the women fast at the 
Thesmophoria, sitting on the ground. While Beotians 
move the palace of Achea,! giving that festival the 
name of Kpachthé [the Grief-bringing], as though 
Demeter were in grief (dyer) on account of the Descent 2 
of Koré. 

4, And this month is the one for sowing when the 
Pleiades rise, which Egyptians call Athyr’ Greeks 
Pyanepsion, and Boeeotians Damatrios,* 

5. Moreover, Theopompus® tells us that the Western 
peoples® consider and name the winter Kronos, the 
summer Aphrodite, and the spring Persephone; and 
[say] that all things are born from Kronos and 
Aphrodite. 

6. While the Phrygians, thinking that the God sleeps 
in winter, and wakes in summer, celebrate in his 
honour the Orgies of his “Going to sleep” at one time, 
and at another of his “Waking up”; while the 
Paphlagonians pretend that he is bound hand and foot 
and imprisoned in winter, and in spring is set in 
motion and freed from his bonds, 

LXX., 1. And the season of the year since that the 
appearance of mourning is assumed at the hiding away 
of grains [in the earth],—which the ancients did not 


1 A surname of Demeter, by which she was worshipped at 
Athens by the Gephyrzans who had emigrated thither from Beotia 
(Herod., v. 61). : 

2 Se. into Hades. 

3 Copt. Hathér—corr. roughly to November, or rather last half 
of October and first of November. Cf. also lvi. 10. 

* That is, the month of Demeter. 

_ © Miller, i, 328. TT. flourished 2nd half of 4th century B.c. 

° That is, presumably, the Celts. 


oo ee, 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 351 


consider gods, but gifts of the Gods, indispensable 
[indeed] if we are to live otherwise then savagely and 
like the brutes. 

2, And at the season when, you know, these 
[ancients] saw the [fruits] entirely disappearing from 
the trees and ceasing, and those they had sown them- 
selves still scanty and poor,—in scraping away the 
earth with their hands, and pressing it together again, 
and depositing [the seed] in uncertainty as to whether 
it would come up again and have its proper consumma- 
tion, they used to do many things similar to those who 
bury and mourn. 

3. Then, just as we say that one who buys Plato’s 
books “buys Plato,” and that one who presents the 
creations of Menander “acts Menander,” so did they not 
hesitate to call the gifts and creations of the Gods by 
the names of the Gods—honouring them and reverencing 
them by use. 

4, But those [who came] after, receiving [these names] 
like boors and ignorantly misapplying what happens? 
to the fruits to the Gods [themselves], and not merely 
calling but believing the advent and hiding away of the 
necessaries [of life] generations and destructions of gods, 
filled their heads with absurd, indecent, and confused 
opinions, although they had the absurdity of their un- 
reason before their eyes. 

5. Excellent, however, was the view of Xenophanes 2 
of Colophon that Egyptians don’t mourn if they believe 
in Gods and don’t believe in Gods if they mourn; nay, 
that it would be ridiculous for them in the same breath 
to mourn and pray for the seed to appear again, in order 
that it might again be consumed and mourned for. 


1 +a wd0n—lit., “ the passions,” 
2 X. flourished about end of 6th and beginning of 5th 
century B,C. 


352 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


LXXI. 1. But such is not really the case; but, 
while mourning for the grain, they pray the Gods, 
the authors and givers [of it], to renew it again 
and make other grow up in the place of that which 
is consumed. 

2. Whence there is an excellent saying among the 
philosophers, that those who do not learn how to hear 
names rightly, use things wrongly. Just as those of the 
Greeks who have not learned or accustomed themselves 
to call bronzes and pictures and marbles images in 
honour of the Gods, but [call them] Gods, [and] then 
make bold to say that Lacharés stripped Athena, and 
Dionysius cut off Apollo’s golden curls, and that 
Capitoline Zeus was burnt and perished in the Civil 
Wars,—these without knowing it find themselves drawn 
into adopting mischievous opinions following [directly] 
on the [abuse of] names. 

3. And this is especially the case of Egyptians with 
regard to the honours they pay to animals. For in this 
respect, at anyrate, Greeks speak rightly when they 
consider the dove as the sacred creature of Aphrodite, 
and the dragon of Athena, and the raven of Apollo, and 
the dog of Artemis, as Euripides [sings] : 


Thou shalt be dog, pet of torch-bearing Hecate.! 


4, Whereas most of the Egyptians, by the service 
and cult they pay to the animals themselves as though 
they were Gods, have not only covered their sacred 
rites entirely with laughter and ridicule—which is the 
least evil of their fatuity; but a dangerous way of 
thinking grows up which perverts the weak and simple 
to pure superstition, and, in the case of the shrewder 
and bolder, degenerates into an atheistic and brutal 
rationalism. 

1 Nauck, p. 525. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 353 


5. Wherefore, also, it is not unfitting to run through 
the conjectures about these things. 


CONCERNING THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS, AND 
TOTEMISM 


LXXII. 1. As for the [theory] that the Gods out 
of fear of Typhon changed themselves into these 
animals—as it were hiding themselves in the bodies 
of ibises and dogs and hawks—it beats any juggling or 
story-telling. 

2. Also the [theory] that all the souls of the dead 
that persist, have their rebirth? into these [animals] 
only, is equally incredible, 

3. And of those who would assign some reason 
connected with the art of government, some say that 
Osiris upon his great campaign’ divided his force 
into many divisions—(they call them companies and 
squadrons in Greek)— and gave them all ensigns 
of animal figures, and that each of these became 
sacred and venerated by the clan of those banded 
together under it. 

4, Others [say] that the kings after [Osiris], in order 


1 Dr Budge (op. cit., i. 29) writes: “Such monuments and 
texts as we have . . . seem to show that the Egyptians first 
worshipped animals as animals, and nothing more, and later as 
the habitations of divine spirits and gods ; but there is no reason 
for thinking that the animal worship of the Egyptians was 
descended from a system of totems and fetishes as Mr J. F. 
M‘Lennan (Fortnightly Review, 1869-1870) believed.” I believe 
myself that the Egyptian animal-cult depended chiefly on the 
fact that life flowed differently in different animal forms, corre- 
sponding with the life-currents in the invisible forms or aspects 
of the Animal-Soul of the Cosmos. 

2 wadvyyevectav. 

3 Sc. for civilising the world. 

VOL. I. 23 


354 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


to strike terror into their foes, used to appear dressed 
in wild beasts’ heads of gold and silver. 

5. While others tell us that one of the clever and 
crafty kings, on learning that, though the Egyptians 
were fickle by nature and quick for change and innova- 
tion, they nevertheless possessed an invincible and 
unrestrainable might owing to their numbers when in 
agreement and co-operation, showed them and implanted 
into their minds an enduring superstition,—an occasion 
of unceasing disagreement. 

6. For in as much as the beasts—some of which he 
enacted some [clans] should honour and venerate 
and others others—are hostile and inimical to one 
another, and as each one of them by nature likes 
different food from the others, each [clan] in protecting 
its own special [beasts] and growing angry at their 
being injured, was for ever unconsciously being drawn 
into the enmities of the beasts, and [so] brought into 
a state of warfare with the others. 

7. For even unto this day the people of Wolf-town 
are the only Egyptians who eat sheep, because the 
wolf, whom they regard as god, [does so]. 

8. And the people of Oxyrhynchus-town, in our 
own day, when the folk of Dog-town ate the oxyrhyn- 
chus! fish, caught a dog and sacrificing it as a sacred 
victim, ate it; and going to war because of this, they 
handled one another roughly, and subsequently were 
roughly handled by the Romans in punishment.” 

LXXIII. 1. Again, as many say that the soul of 
Typhon himself was parted among these animals, the 
myths would seem enigmatically to hint that every 
irrational and brutal nature is born from a part of the 


1 Lit., “sharp-snout.” 
2 And such things occur “even to this-day” in India under 
the British Raj. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 355 


Evil Daimon, and that to appease and soothe him they 
pay cult and service to them. 

2. But if he fall upon them mighty and dire, bringing 
on them excessive droughts, or pestilent diseases, or 
other unlooked-for strange mischances, then the priests 
lead away at dark in silence quietly some of the 
venerated [beasts], and threaten and try to scare 
away the first [one] of them ; if, however, it stops, they 
consecrate and sacrifice it, as though, I suppose, this 
were some kind of chastisement of the Daimon, or 
some specially great means of purification in the 
greater [emergencies ]. 

3. For in the Goddess-of-child-bed-town! they used 
to burn living men to ashes, as Manethds has told us, 
calling them Typhoneian; and the ashes they win- 
nowed away and scattered.? 

4, This, however, was done publicly, and at one 
special time, in the Dog-days; whereas the consecrat- 
ings of the venerated beasts, which are never spoken of 
and take place at irregular times, according to the 
emergencies, are unknown to the multitude, except 
when they have burials, and [the priests] bringing out 
some of the others, cast them in [to the grave with 
them] in the presence of all_—in the belief that they 
annoy Typhon in return and curtail what gives him 
pleasure. For only the Apis and a few other [animals] 
seem to be sacred to Osiris; while they assign the 
majority to him [Typhon]. 

5. And if he [Osiris] is really Reason (Logos), I 
think that the object of our enquiry is found in the 
case of these [animals] that are admitted to have common 
honours with him,—as, for instance, the ibis, and hawk, 
and dog-headed ape; [while] Apis himself [is his 

1 éy elAciOvlas were. 
2 Over the fields ? 


356 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


soul . . .],1 for thus, you know, they call the goat at 
Mendes. 

LXXIV. 1. There remain of course the utilitarian and 
symbolical [reasons], of which some have to do with 
one of the two [Gods], but most [of them] with both. 

2. As for the ox and sheep and ichneumon,? it is 
clear they paid them honours on account of their 
usefulness and utility,—just as Lemnians crested larks 
which seek out and break the eggs of locusts, and 
Thessalians storks, because when their land produced 
multitudes of snakes, they came and destroyed them all— 
(wherefore they made a law that whoever killed a stork 
should be banished *)—so with the asp and weasel and 
scarab, because they discerned in them certain faint 
likenesses of the power of the Gods, as it were [that] 
of the sun in water-drops. 

3. For as to the weasel, many still think and say 
that as it is impregnated through the ear and brings 
forth by the mouth, it is a likeness of the birth of 
reason (logos).* 

4, Again [they say] the species of scarab has no 
female, but all, as males, discharge their seed into the 
stuff they have made into balls,° which they roll along 
by pushing, moving [themselves] in the opposite 
direction, just as the sun seems to turn the heaven 
round in the opposite direction, while it is [the heaven] 
itself that moves from west to east.® 


1 A lacuna occurs here which I have partially filled up, 
conjecturally, as above. 

2 An Egyptian animal of the weasel kind which was said to 
hunt out crocodiles’ eggs ; also called “ Pharaoh’s rat.” 

3 Of. Arist., Mirab., xxiii. 

4 Of. xxii. 1—“ Physiologus” again. For a criticism of this 
legend, see R. 43. ~ 5 Cf. x. 9. 

6 Budge (op. cit., ii. 379 f.) writes: “The beetle or scarabzeus... 
belongs to the family called Scarabacide (Coprophagi), of which 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 357 


5, And the asp, because it does not age, and moves 
without limbs with ease and pliancy, they likened to 
a star. 

LXXV. 1. Nay, not even has the crocodile had honour 
paid it without some show of credible cause, for it 
alone is tongue-less.* 

For the Divine Reason (Logos) stands not in need 
of voice, and: 


“ Moving on a soundless path with justice guides [all] 
mortal things.” ? 


2. And they say that it alone, when it is in the water, 
has its eyes covered by a smooth and transparent mem- 
brane that comes down from the upper lid,® so that they 
see without being seen,—an attribute of the First God.* 

3. And whenever the female lays her eggs on the land, 
it is known that this will be the limit of the Nile’s 

> 


the Scarabeus sacer is the type. ... A remarkable peculiarity 
exists in the structure and situation of the hind legs, which are 
placed so near the extremity of the body, and so far from each 
other as to give the insect a most extraordinary appearance when 
walking. This peculiar formation is, nevertheless, particularly 
serviceable to its possessors in rolling the balls of excrementitious 
matter in which they enclose their eggs. . . . These balls are at 
first irregular and soft, but, by degrees, and during the process of 
rolling along, become rounder and harder ; they are propelled by 
means of the hind legs. Sometimes these balls are an inch and a 
half, or two inches in diameter, and in rolling this along the 
beetles stand almost upon their heads, with the heads turned from 
the balls.” The scarabeeus was cailed kheprerd in Egyptian, and 
was the symbol of Khepera the Great God of creation and resurrec- 
tion ; he was the “father of the gods,” and the creator of all things 
in heaven and earth, self-begotten and self-born ; he was usually 
identified with the rising sun and new-birth generally. 

1 “Physiologus” again, doubtless ; it might, however, be said 
that its tongue is rudimentary. 

2 Euripides, Tro., 887. 

5 Lit., “brow.” 

4 That is, the First-born Reason. 


358 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


increase. For as they cannot lay in the water, and fear 
to do so far from it, they so accurately fore-feel what 
will be, that they make use of the rise of the river for 
laying their eggs and hatching them, and yet keep them 
dry and beyond the danger of being wetted. 

4, And they lay sixty [eggs] and hatch them out in 
as many days, and the longest-lived of them live as 
many years,—which is the first of the measures for those 
who treat systematically of celestial [phenomena]. 

5. Moreover, of those that have honours paid them for 
both [reasons]*—of the dog, we have already treated 
above.’ 

6. As for the ibis, while killing the death-dealing of 
the reptiles,‘ it was the first to teach them the use of 
me licinal evacuation, when they observed it being thus 
rinsed out and purged by itself. 

7. While those of the priests who are most punctilious 
in their observances, in purifying themselves, take the 
water for cleansing from a place where the ibis has 
drunk ; for it neither drinks unwholesome or poisoned ® 
water, nor [even] goes near it. 

8 Again, by the relative position of its legs to one 
another, and [of these] to its beak, it forms an equilateral 
triangle; and yet again, the variegation and admixture 
of its black with its white feathers suggest the gibbous 
moon.” 4 

9. Nor ought we to be surprised at Egyptians being 
so fond of meagre likenesses ; for Greeks too in both their 


1 That is, presumably, either the 60 of the Chaldeans, or the 
3x 4x5 of the “most perfect” triangle of the Mathematici. 

2 Namely, the utilitarian and symbolical ; cf. Ixxiv. 1. 

3 Cf. xiv..6. 

* Cf. Rawlinson’s Herodotus, ii. 124, 125. 

5 There is a similar legend in India, I am told. 

8 May also mean “ bewitched.” 

7 That is, the moon in its third quarter. 


——— es > 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 359 


pictured and plastic resemblances of Gods use many 
such [vague indications]. 

10. For instance, in Crete there was a statue of Zeus 
which had no ears,—for it behoves the Ruler and Lord 
of all to listen to no one. 

11. And Pheidias used the serpent in the [statue] of 
Athena, and the tortoise in that of Aphrodite at Elis, 
—because on the one hand virgins need protecting, and 
on the other because keeping-at-home and silence are 
becoming to married women. 

12. Again, the trident of Poseidon is a symbol of the 
third region, which the sea occupies, assigned [to him] 
after the heaven and air. For which cause also they 
invented the names Amphi-trite and Trit-ons.! 

13. And the Pythagoreans have embellished both 
numbers and figures with appellations of Gods. 

For they used to call the equilateral triangle Athena 
—Head-born and Third-born*—because it is divided 
by three plumb-lines* drawn from the three angles, 

14, And [they called] “one” Apollo, from privation 
of multitudes and owing to the singleness® of the 
monad; and “two” Strife and Daring, and “three” 
Justice [or Rightness],—for as wronging and being 
wronged were according to deficiency and excess, right- 
ness [or justice] was born to equality between them.*® 


1 From rpirds, “ third.” 

2 nopupayeyvh Kal rprroyéverav,—that is, Koryphagennés and 
Tritogeneia. 

3 rpicd nabérors,—a KdBeros (sc. ypauuh) is generally a perpen- 
dicular ; but here the reference must be to this appended figure : 

4 That is, presumably, 4&-xéAawy, from 4 (priv.) and woAdol 
(many). : 
5 8” awaérnra,—the play being apparently &-woa (wA0)-rns, 
6 Lit., in the midst. 


360 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


15. And what is called the Tetraktys, the six-and- 
thirty, was [their] greatest oath (as has been said over 
and over again), and is called Cosmos,—which is produced 
by adding together the first four even and [the first] 
four odd [numbers].? 

LXXVI. 1. If, then, the most approved of the philo- 
sophers, when they perceived in soulless and bodiless 
things a riddle of the Divine, did not think it right to 
neglect anything or treat it with disrespect, still more 
liking, I think, we should then have for the peculiarities 
in natures that are endowed with sense and possess soul 
and passion and character,—not paying honour to these, 
but through them to the Divine; so that since they are 
made by Nature into mirrors clearer [than any man 
can make], we should consider this as the instrument 
and art of God who ever orders all things. 

2. And, generally, we should deem that nothing 
soulless is superior to a thing with soul, nor one with- 
out sense to one possessing it; not even if one should 
bring together into one spot all the gold and emeralds 
in the world. 

3. For that which is Divine does not reside in 
colours or shapes or smoothnesses; nay, all things 
that either have no share or are not of a nature to 
share in life, have a lot of less value than that of 
dead bodies.” 

4. Whereas the Nature that lives and sees, and 
has its source of motion from itself, and knowledge of 
things that are its and those that are not, has appro- 

1 The Tetraktys was ordinarily considered to be the sum of the 
first four numbers simply, that is 1+2+3+4=10; but here we 
have it given as 1+3+5+7=16, and 2+4+6+8=20, and 16+ 
20=36. The oath is said to have been: “Yea, by Him who 
did bestow upon our soul Tetraktys, Ever-flowing Nature, Source 


possessing roots”—the “roots” being the four elements. 
2 Sc. which have at least been the vehicle of life. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 361 


priated both an “efflux of the Good,”! and a share of 
the Thinker “by whom the universe is steered,” as 
Heracleitus says.? 

5. For which cause the Divine is not less well 
pourtrayed in these [sc. animals] than by means of 
works of art in bronze and stone, which while equally 
susceptible of decay and mutilations? are in their 
nature destitute of all feeling and understanding. 

6. With regard to the honours paid to animals, then, 
I approve this view more highly than any other that 
has been mentioned. 


CONCERNING THE SACRED ROBES 


LXXVII. 1. Now as to robes: those of Isis [are] 
variegated in their dyes, for her power [is] connected 
with matters producing all things and receiving [all]— 
light darkness, day night, fire water, life death, beginning 
end; while the [robe] of Osiris has neither shade nor 
variegation, but one single [property ]—the light-like,* 
for the Source is pure and the First and Intelligible 
unmixed. 

2. Wherefore when they have once and once only 
received this [robe], they treasure it away and keep it 
from all eyes and hands; whereas they use those of Isis 
on many occasions, 

3. For it is by use that the things which are sensible 
and ready to hand, present many unfoldings and views 
of themselves as they change now one way now another ; 

1 Plat., Pheedr., 251 B. 

2 Mullach, i. 328, 

3 Reading rnpdcets. 

4 7d gwroedés. Cf. the better-known term 1) aiyoedés, “the 
ray-like” (augoetdes). 

5 Presumably in the initiation symbolising the investiture with 
the Robe of Glory. 


362 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


whereas the intelligence of the Intelligible and Pure 
and Single, shining through the soul, like lightning- 
flash, once and once only perchance allows [us] to 
contact and behold [It]. 

4, For which cause both Plato! and Aristotle call 
this part of philosophy “epoptic,”? from the fact that 
they who transcend by the reason (Jogos) these mixed 
and multiform things of opinion, are raised unto that 
- Primal [One], Simple and Matter-less, and [so] contact- 
ing in its singleness the pure truth concerning It, they 
think philosophy has as it were [its] perfect end. 

LXXVIII. 1. The fact, moreover, which the present 
priests cautiously hint at by expiatory sacrifices and 
covering their faces—[namely] that this God is ruler 
and king of the dead, being no other than him who is 
called Hades and Pluto among Greeks—in that they 
do not know how it is true, confuses the multitude, who 
suppose that the truly sacred and holy Osiris lives on 
earth and under earth, where the bodies of those who 
seem to have [reached their] end are hidden [away]. 

2. But He Himself is far, far from the earth, un- 
spotted and unstained, and pure of every essence that 
is susceptible of death and of decay. Nor can the souls 
of men here [on the earth], swathed as they are with 
bodies and enwrapped in passions, commune with God, 
except so far as they can reach some dim sort of a 
dream [of Him], with the perception of a mind trained 
in philosophy. 

3. But when [their souls] freed [from these bonds] 
pass to the Formless and Invisible and Passionless and 
Pure, this God becomes their guide and king, as though 
they hung on Him, and gazed insatiate upon His Beauty, 

1 Symp., 210 a. 

2 In its highest sense—that is, intelligible or spiritual “seership,” 
not the symbolic “sight” in the formal Greater Mysteries. : 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 363 


and longed after it—[Beauty] that no man can declare 
or speak about. 

4, It is with this the ancient tale (logos) makes Isis 
eer in love, and, by pursuit [of it], and consort [with 
it], makes [her] full-fill all things down here with all 
things fair and good, whatever things have part in 
genesis. 

5. Thus, then, these things contain the reason (logos) 
that’s more suitable to God. 


CONCERNING INCENSE 


LXXIX. 1. And must I also speak of the daily incense- 
offerings, as I promised, the reader should first of all 
have in mind the fact, that not only have men [in 
general] always paid most serious attention to things 
that conduce to health, but that especially in sacred 
ceremonies and purifications and prescribed modes of 
life “ healthy ” is not less important than “holy”; for 
they did not think it right to render service to the Pure 
and perfectly Harmless and Unpolluted with either 
bodies or with souls festering and diseased. 

2. Since, then, the air—of which we make most use, 
and with which we have most to do—does not always 
keep the same disposition and blend, but at night is 
condensed, and weighs down the body, and brings the 
soul into a desponding and anxious state, as though it 
had become mist-like and heavy ; [therefore] as soon as 
they get up they incense with pine resin, sanifying 
and purifying the air by its ? disintegration, and fanning 
up again the [fire of the] spirit connate with body * 

1 Of, lii. 5. 

2 Sc. the resin’s. 


3 That is, presumably, what was called the “ bodily or animal 
spirits” —the ethers or prdna’s. 


364 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


which had died down,—since its perfume possesses a 
vehement and penetrating [force]. 

3. And, again, at mid-day, perceiving that the sun 
draws from the earth by force an exceedingly large and 
heavy exhalation, and commingles it with the air, they 
incense with myrrh. For its heat dissolves and dis- 
perses the turbid and mud-like combination in the 
atmosphere. 

4, And, indeed, physicians seem to relieve sufferers 
from plague by making a great blaze, as though it 
cleared the air. But it clears it better if they burn 
fragrant woods, such as [those] of cypress, juniper, and 
pine. 

5. At anyrate, they say that at Athens, at the time 
of the Great Plague, Akron the physician became 
famous through ordering them to keep fires burning by 
the side of the sick, for he [thus] benefitted not a few. 

6. And Aristotle says that the sweet-smelling odours, 
given off by perfumes and flowers and meadows, conduce 
no less to health than to enjoyment; because by their 
warmth and softness they diffuse themselves gently 
through the brain, which is naturally cold and as though 
congested. 

7. And if, moreover, they call myrrh bal among 
Egyptians—and in translation this comes pretty near 
to meaning the dispersion of silly talk—this also affords 
some evidence for the reason why [they use it]. 

LXXX. 1. And [finally] Auphi? is a mixture com- 
posed of sixteen ingredients: of honey, and wine, 
and raisins, and cypérus;* of pine-resin, and myrrh, 


1 The resinous gum of an Arabian tree ; probably a kind of | 


acacia, 

2 This was also used as a medicine. 

3 xumelpov,—Cyperus comosus, an aromatic plant used in embalm- 
ing, a sweet-smelling marsh plant. Cf. F. cypére and E. cypres. 


ee 


ee eer 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 365 


and aspalathus,! and seseli;? and further of mastich, 
and bitumen,‘ and nightshade,> and sorrel; and in 
addition to these of both junipers ® (of which they call 
the one the larger and the other the smaller), and 
cardamum, and sweet-flag.’ 

2. And these are not compounded in a haphazard 
way, but with the sacred writings being read aloud® to 
the perfume-makers when they mix them. 

3. And as to their number,—even though it has all 
the appearance of square from square, and [that too] 
the only one of equally equal numbers that has the 
power of making the perimeter equal to the area,® it 
must be said that its serviceableness for this purpose 
at least is of the slightest. 

4. But the majority of the ingredients, as they possess 
aromatic properties, liberate a sweet breath and healthy 
exhalation, by which both the air is changed, and the 
body being gently and softly moved by the vapour, 
falls asleep’® and loosens the distressing strain of the 
day’s anxieties, as though they were knots, [and yet] 
without any intoxication. 


1 &anaddbov,—a prickly shrub yielding a fragrant oil; 
mentioned in the Apocrypha and in some old herbalists, Cf. 
“T gave a sweet smell like cinnamon and aspalathus”—Ecclus. 
xxiv. 15. It was not the Genista acanthoclada, 

2 geoérews,—the Tordyliwm officinale; formerly called in 
English also “ cicely.” 

3 e¢xtvov,—or may be “ squill.” 

4 &opdarov. 

5 @ptov,—or may be “ rush.” 

6 Lit., juniper-berries. 

7 «ddAapov,—probably Acorus calamus (of. Ex. xxx. 23 et al.). 
It is to be noticed that the ingredients are arranged in four sets of 
four each, ey : 

8 That is to the sound of mantrdh, as a Hindu would say. 

® Cf. xlii. 2 and figure in note. 

10 The kuphi being used at sundown. 


366 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


5. Moreover, they polish up the image-making and 
receptive organ of dreams like a mirror, and make it 
clearer, no less than the playing on the lyre which the 
Pythagoreans used to use before sleep, thus charming 
away and sanifying the passionate and reason-less 
nature of the soul. 

6. For things smelt call back the failing sense, and 
often, on the other hand, dull and quiet it by [their] 
soothing [effect], when their exhalations are diffused 
through the body ; just as some of the physicians say 
that sleep is induced when the vaporisation of the 
food, as it were creeping gently round the inward parts 
and groping about, produces a kind of tickling. 

7. And they use kupht both as draught and mixture; 
for when it is drunk it is thought to purge the intestines, 
[but when applied externally '] to be an emollient. 

8. And apart from these [considerations], resin is a 
work of the sun; and myrrh [comes from] the exuda- 
tion of the trees under the sun-heat; while of the 
ingredients of kuphi, some flourish more at night, like 
all things whose nature it is to be nourished by cool 
breezes and shade and dew and damp. 

9. Seeing that the light of day is one and single, and 
Pindar tells us that the sun is seen “through empty 
ether ”;? while air is a blend and mixture of many 
lights and properties, as it were of seeds dropped from 
every star into one [field]. 

10. Naturally, then, they use the former as incenses 
by day, as being single and having their birth from the 
sun ; and the latter when night sets in, as being mixed 
and manifold in its qualities, 


1 A lacuna of 8 or 9 letters occurs here in E. 
2 Olymp., i. 6. 


THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS 367 


AFTERWORD 


So ends this exceedingly instructive treatise of 
Plutarch, which, in spite of the mass of texts and monu- 
ments concerning Asar and Ast which have already been 
deciphered by the industry of Egyptologists, remains 
the most complete account of the root mystery-myth of 
ancient Egypt. The myth of Osiris and Isis goes back 
to the earliest times of which we have record, and is 
always found in the same form. Indeed the “ Ritual,” 
the “ Book of the Dead,” which should rather be called 
the “Book of the Living,” might very well be styled 
“The Gospel of Osiris.” 

It would be out of place here to seek for the 
historical origin of this Great Mystery ; certainly Osiris 
was originally something greater than a “ water sprite,” 
as Budge supposes. Osiris and Isis were and are 
originally, as I believe, cosmic or super-cosmic beings; 
for the Elder and Younger Horus, regarded macrocos- 
mically, were the Intelligible and Sensible Worlds, and, 
regarded microcosmically, pertained to the mystery of 
the Christ-stage of manhood. 

It may, of course, be denied that the ancient Egyp- 
tians were capable of entertaining any such notions; 
we, however, prefer the tradition of our Trismegistic 
tractates to the “ primitive-culture ” theories of anthro- 
pological speculation. That, however, such views were 
entertained in the first centuries is incontrovertible, as 
may be seen from a careful study of Philo of Alexandria 
alone. Thus to quote one passage out of many with 
regard to the two Horoi: 

“For that this cosmos is the Younger Son of God, in 
that it is perceptible to sense. The Son who’s older 
than this one, He hath declared to be no one [perceptible 
by sense], for that he is conceivable by mind alone. 


368 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


But having judged him worthy of the Elder’s rights, 
He hath determined that he should remain with Him 
alone.” ? 

When, moreover, we speak of the Christ-stage of 
manhood, we mean all that mystery that lies beyond the 
normal stage of man, including both the super-man 
stage and that of the Christ. 

In any case, Plutarch is of the greatest service for 
understanding the atmosphere and environment in 
which the students of the Trismegistic tradition moved, 
and we have therefore bestowed more care upon him 
than perhaps the general reader may think necessary. 


1 Quod Deus Im., §6; M. 1, 277, P. 298 (Ri. ii. 72, 73). 


X 
“HERMAS” AND “ HERMES” 


AN ANTICIPATION 


WueN, in a recent book,! I was treating of the Early 
Church document Zhe Shepherd of Hermas, in con- 
nection with the ancient and mysterious Book of Elxai, 
which, according to Epiphanius, circulated among the 
Essenes, Nazorenes, Ebionites, and Sampszans, I wrote 
as follows: 

“Tt is also of very great interest to notice the many 
intimate points of contact between the contents of 
the Apocalyptic Hermas and the teaching of the Early 
‘Shepherd of Men’ tractate of the mystic school who 
looked to Hermes the Thrice-Greatest as their inspirer, 
that is to say, the earliest deposit of the Trismegistic 
literature. But that is another story which has not 
yet been told.” 

At the same time, all unknown to me, Reitzenstein 
must have written, or have been writing, his learned 
pages on “ Hermas and Poimandres,” coming to practi- 
cally the same conclusion as I had in cruder form 
expressed several years earlier, when commenting on 
Hilgers’ theory? that the “Shepherd of Men” was 


1 Did Jesus Live 100 B.c.?—An Enquiry into the Talmud Jesus 
Stories, the Toldoth Jeschu, and Some Curious Statements of 
Epiphanius (London, 1903), pp. 365 ff. 

2 See Hilgers (J.), De Hermetis Trismegistt Poimandro Com- 
mentatio (Bonn, 1855). 

VOL. I, 369 24 


370 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


written in opposition to the “Shepherd of Hermas,” 
and suggesting that if there were any dependence of 
one on the other, it was in exactly the reverse sense 
to that of Hilger’s assumption. 


THE HIGHER CRITICISM OF “ THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS” 


Like all the other extant extra-canonical documents 
of the Early Church, and especially the Antilegomena, 
as Eusebius calls them, that is to say books disputed 
in his day but earlier admitted by wide circles into the 
canon, T’he Shepherd of Hermas has been submitted to 
the most searching analysis by modern criticism. 
Though its unity is still strenuously defended by some 
scholars, the majority are convinced of its composite 
nature; and I follow Hilgenfeld,? who detects in the 
present form of this document three elements, or, so to 
say, three deposits: (i.) The Apocalyptic—Viss. i—iv. ; 
(ii.) The Pastoral—Vis, v.—Sim. vii. ; (iii.) The Secondary, 
or appendix of the latest redactor—Simm. viii~x. 
“ Hermas i.” and “ Hermas ii.” cite nothing from any of 
the canonical books of the New Testament, and this 
should be, for most scholars, a striking indication of 
their early date. 


THE INTRODUCTION OF THE “ PASTORAL HERMAS ” 


“Hermas ii,” the “Pastoral Hermas,” begins as 
follows : * 


1. “Now when I had prayed in my house, and sat me 


1 See The Theosophical Review, xxiv. 302, 303 (June 1899). 

* Hilgenfeld (A.), Herme Pastor (2nd ed.: Leipzig, 1881). 

3 *AwoxdAvyis ¢,—the fifth revelation or vision of our composite 
document, which for all we know may have stood first in some 
earlier “ source.” 


‘* HERMAS ” AND “‘ HERMES” 371 


down upon my couch, there entered a man of glorious 
appearance, in the guise of a Shepherd, clad in a white 
skin,’ with a wallet on his shoulders, and a staff in 
his hand. And he embraced me, and I embraced him.? 

2. “ And straightway he sat down by my side. He 
saith to me: I am sent by the most Sovereign 
Angel, that I may dwell with thee for the rest of the 
days of thy life. 

3. “I thought that he had come to tempt me; * and I say 
unto him: Who art thou? For I do know (say I) into 
whose charge I have been given. He saith tome: Dost 
thou not know? Nay—answer I. I am (saith he) the 
Shepherd ‘ into whose charge thou hast been given. 

4, “F’en as he spoke, his aspect changed, and I knew 
him, that it was he to whom I had been given in 
charge.” 


COMPARISON WITH OUR “ P@MANDRES” 


If we now compare the Greek text of this interesting 
passage with that of the introductory paragraphs of the 
“ Poemandres,” it will be found impossible to refer their 
striking similarities merely to a common type of ex- 
pression; the verbal agreements are too precise, and 


1 Presumably a sheep’s skin of white wool. 

2 Compare the Story of the Spirit Double who came down unto 
Jesus when a boy, as told by Mary the Mother, in the Pistis Sophia, 
121: “ He embraced thee and kissed thee, and thou also didst kiss 
him ; ye became one.” Compare this with the common mystic 
belief of the time in the possibility of union with such a spiritual 
presence ; and also the possession by a daimon (ajys Safpovos), 
which is treated of at length by Reitzenstein, and particularly 
referred to this pasage in Hermas (R. 230). 

3 Compare Pistis Sophia, 120: “I was in doubt and thought it 
was a phantom tempting me.” 

* On this Gebhardt and Harnack, in their edition (Leipzig, 
1877), can only comment : “ In visiontbus angelicus pastor nusquam 
memoratur.” 


372 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


stand out convincingly at the first glance, without need- 
ing the assistance of the large type in which Reitzenstein 
(pp. 11, 12) has had them printed in his reproduction 
of the texts. 

Most remarkable of all, however, is the similarity of 
ideas; for “Hermas” as for “Hermes” the Shepherd 
is not only a shepherd but a “ shepherd of men,” even 
as in a different connection but in the same circle of 
ideas Peter and others were to become “ fishers of men.” ! 

Now, not only on general grounds is it difficult for 
any one who has carefully studied the two documents, 
to believe that the writer of the philosophic-mystical 
treatise not only had the Christian apocalyptic writing 
before him but took it as his point of departure; but, 
even if we are still strongly dominated by what has 
hitherto been the traditional view in all such questions, 
and cling to the theory that when there is similarity 
the Christian scripture must necessarily have been first 
in the field, it is very difficult to believe that a copier 
of “ Hermas” should have left no traces of an acquaint- 
ance with the very distinctive feature of the robe and 
staff and wallet of the shepherd, and of the conversation 
which follows in what, on this theory, would be the 
presupposed original. 


THE PopuLAR SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATION OF 
THE SHEPHERD 


The mystical representation and thought-atmosphere 
of the writer or redactor of our present “ Poemandres” 
are far removed from any direct traces of contact with 
the folk-consciousness, in which the appurtenances men- 
tioned by “ Hermas” were the typical literary description 


1 Compare the interesting inscription from Sakkara got 
from Erman (note, below). 


ee 


‘“ HERMAS” AND “ HERMES ” 373 


of a shepherd since the time of Theocritus;! not only 
so, but this was the symbolic representation of the 
“Shepherd of Men” in the general Hellenistic religious 
consciousness. Indeed, we find unquestionable proofs 
that Hermes was pre-eminently regarded as the “ Good 
Shepherd,” and a figure of him with staff and wallet and 
single robe was a great favourite in the popular cult.” 

In one passage* in which mention is made of this 
wallet and staff, further details are given showing that 
these simple symbols were well understood. The right 
hand is raised, and the left holds staff and wallet. 
Moreover, the staff has a serpent entwined round it, 
and Hermes is clad in a single robe. Like Isis, he 
stands upon the world-sphere, which has also a serpent 
twined round it. Hermes here represents the Mind or 
Logos, the father-mother (staff and wallet) force of 
nature; with the “left” he brings into generation, with 
the “right” he leads souls out of genesis, either to death, 
or regeneration. In this prayer, Hermes (as the sun) is 
called “the Shepherd who hath his fold in the West.” 4 

It is to be further remarked that Hermes is in the 
dress of the “ Poor,”® and of the “ Naked.” ® 

1 R. 11, n. 3. 

2 Compare Wessely, Denkschr. d. K. K. Akad. (1888), 103, 2359 ff. 

3 Ibid., 104, 2373. 

* Erman (Agypten, 515) refers to an inscription from Sakkara, 
in which a mystical shepherd says to his flock : “ Your Shepherd 
is in the West with the fishes,”—an interesting conjunction of 
ideas for students of archaic Christian symbolism. The idea 1s 
also Babylonian, the Star-flocks of the Gods being fed beyond the 
Ocean in the West. 

5 Compare the dress of the Essenes, and the account of the send- 
ing forth of the disciples, Matt. x. 9=Mark vi. 8=Luke ix. 3. 
The direct contradiction of the account in Mark to the statements 
in Matthew and Luke, makes it exceedingly probable that not only 
the one robe, and staff, but also the wallet, were the typical signs 


of those who went forth to “raise the dead.” 
6 He is clad in the wepi{wua, the working dress (or apron), © 


374 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


THE NAME “ HERMAS” 


But to return to Hermas. Why “ Hermas” of all 
names in the world in this connection? We have a 
large literature in which “ Hermes” plays the part of 
seer, and prophet, and revealer, and writer of sacred 
scriptures ; in it, moreover, he figures as the beloved 
disciple of the Heavenly Mind, the Shepherd of Men. 
But what have we in Christian tradition to explain the 
name “Hermas”? Nothing, absolutely nothing, but 
contradictory hypotheses which try to discover a 
historic Hermas so as to authenticate the provenance 
of what is manifestly, like nearly every similar 
document of the time, pseudepigraphic. In my 
opinion, indeed, the very name Hermas betrays more 
clearly than anything else the “Hermes” source of 
the Christian writer’s setting of part of his most 
interesting apocalyptic. ‘“Hermas” is because of 
“Hermes,” rather than “Hermes” in answer to 
“Hermas,” as Hilgers would have it. 


AN EARLY FORM OF THE “ P@MANDRES” 


This, however, does not mean to say that “ Hermas” 
took the setting of the introduction of his Pastoral 
apocalypses from precisely the same text of the 
“ Pomandres” which now lies before us, for our 
present text is manifestly the redaction of an earlier 
form ; so that if we could recover the other form we 
should in all probability find some additional verbal 
agreement of “ Hermas” with “ Hermes.” 


in which men were said to work “naked” (nudus, yuuvés)—that 
is, clad in one robe. See also note on the sentence: “‘ And naked 
I sought the Naked,” in treating of the Gymnosophists (or Naked 
Philosophers), in my Apollonius of Tyana (London, 1901), p. 100. 


‘‘ HERMAS” AND ‘‘ HERMES ” 8375 


That the ideas of the “ Poemandres” treatise were 
the mystical and philosophical side of much that 
appears in the popular cult of the time, may be seen 
by an inspection of the prayers from the Magic Papyri 
which we have translated.!_ In them the Mind, as the 
Shepherd of Men, and the Revealer of the Light, is 
clearly set forth. Reitzenstein’s view (p. 32), ac- 
cordingly, is that the Christian writer must have taken 
his description of the Shepherd from what originally 
was a fuller text of the “ Pemandres” than the one 
preserved to us, and that this will account for several 
features which would otherwise be peculiar to “ Hermas,” 
This text was in closer verbal agreement with the 
general language of the popular Hermes religion as 
preserved to us in the Hermes-Prayers.? 


Toe Hoty Mount 


But the direct points of contact between “ Hermas” 
and the Trismegistic literature are not confined to the 
“ Pcemandres” document. As the original writer of 
“ Hermas” was dependent on “ Hermes” for the setting 
of the introduction to his Pastoral apocalypses, so also 
it is highly probable that the redactor was influenced 
by a lost treatise referred to in the introduction of 
“The Sacred Sermon on the Mountain,” C. H., xiii. (xiv.). 

In this treatise reference is made to one of the now 
lost “ General Sermons,”’* the scene of which also took 


1 See “The Popular Theurgic Hermes Cult in the Greek 
Magic Papyri.” 

2 Compare Hermas, Vis. v. 2: “I am sent... that I may 
dwell with thee for the rest of the days of thy life,” with Prayer 
i, 10: “for all the length of my life’s days”; and v.3: “I know 
into whose charge I have been given,” with Prayer ii. 7: “I 
know thee, Hermes.” 

3 éy Trois yevexots. 


376 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


place on a mountain. For in connection with it 
mention is made by Tat of his passing over a moun- 
tain, or ascending a mountain, at the beginning of his 
noviciate, when he became a “suppliant ”;1 while it is 
further stated by Tat that at that stage the doctrine 
was not clearly explained, but rather hidden in riddles ; 
for that as yet he was not sufficiently purified, and 
made “a stranger to the world-illusion.” 

Now, it is remarkable that “ Hermas,” in the appendix 
to the book (Sim. ix.), tells us that after these revela- 
tions the Shepherd came to him again, and told him 
that much had not been explained because of his 
“weakness in the flesh”; but now that he has been 
strengthened by the Spirit, the Shepherd will explain 
all “with greater clearness.” He then takes him away 
into Arcadia (a very unexpected locality for a Chris- 
tian writer in Rome to choose), to a “ breast-like moun- 
tain,” where he has the further teaching revealed 
to him. 

But, strangely enough, it was precisely in Arcadia 
that the chief Hellenic cult of Hermes existed, as stated 
by Lactantius, basing himself on the common belief at 
Rome ;? and from Arcadia it was that Hermes, according 
to a tendency-legend that even at Rome went back at 
least to the second century B.c., set forth to teach the 
Egyptians. 


“ Gnostic” ELEMENTS 


Moreover, “Hermas” is throughout strongly tinged 
with “Gnostic” elements. As I wrote in my last 
book,? it is practically one of the very numerous 


1 A term used by Philo as a synonym of Therapeut. 

2 Div, Institt., i. 6—as cited among Evidences from the Fathers, 
where see my note on Phenéus. 

3 Op. sup. ctt., p. 365. 


‘‘ HERMAS” AND ‘‘ HERMES ” 377 


permutations and combinations of the Sophia-mythus 
—one of the many settings-forth of the mystic lore and 
love of the Christ and the Sophia, or Wisdom, of the Son 
of God and His spouse or sister, the Holy Spirit, of the 
King and Queen, of the Lord and the Virgin Church. 
In its most instructive series of visions are depicted the 
mystic scenes of the allegorical drama of man’s inner 
nature—the mystery-play of all time. 

But when we say ‘‘ Gnostic” we mean much that is 
also Hellenistic mysticism, and therefore much that is 
also “ Hermetic,” for in the Trismegistic literature there 
is set forth a Gnosis of a far simpler type than in any 
of the Christian systems technically called “ Gnostic.” 


THE VICES AND VIRTUES 


A striking example of the similarity of ideas of this 
nature is found in comparing the list of twelve vices 
and ten (seven and three) virtues, given in C. H., xiii. 
(xiv.) 7-10,1 with “ Hermas,” Sim. ix. 15, 1-3, where 
twelve “ virgins,” each bearing the name of a virtue, are 
set over against twelve “ women clothed in black,” each 
bearing the name of a vice; and with “ Hermas,” Vis, iii. 
8, 7, where seven women, each in turn the mother of 
the other, are called by the names of seven virtues. 

We need not, of course, necessarily suppose any direct 
contact in this case, though it is curious that the list 
of virtues occurs precisely in the sermon “On the 
Mountain”; but both writers clearly move in, or are 
influenced by, the same circle of ideas, and that, too, 
ideas of a very special nature. 

The above points are sufficient for our purpose, and 
throw a most interesting light on one element in the 


1 The very treatise to which we have previously referred in 
connection with the “ mountain.” 


378 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


composition of the very ancient Christian document 
whose exclusion from the canon, after enjoying for so 
many years practically canonical authority, is to be 
regretted. 


THE EARLY DATE OF THE ORIGINAL “ HERMAS” 


Now, “Apocalyptic Hermas” is distinctly “anti- 
Pauline,” and perhaps this more than anything else 
accounts for the final exclusion of the book from the 
canon ; it is therefore in vain to seek in it quotations 
from any of the Pauline Letters. But what is still more 
remarkable, neither it nor the “ Pastoral Hermas ” quote 
from any of the Canonical Gospels. This argues a very 
early date. 

If, then, we are inclined to accept the statement of 
the writer of the Muratorian Fragment (c. 170 .D.) 
that “ Hermas” was written at Rome during the bishop- 
ric of Pius (140-c. 155 a.p.), this must refer to the 
completed work of the last redactor who is held re- 
sponsible for “Hermas iii,” and who was acquainted 
with several books of the canon. The “ Pastoral 
Hermas” may thus be fairly pushed back to the be- 
ginning of the first century. 

We have also to remember—a point which Reitzen- 
stein does not seem to have taken into consideration— 
not only that the Greek original of our form of 
“Hermas” is lost, but that the Old Latin version has 
also disappeared, and that we possess only a Greek 
retranslation from the Latin. Under these circum- 
stances, it is still more surprising that such strong traces 
of direct literary dependence on the original form of 
the “ Poemandres” introduction should still remain in 
our “ Hermas.” 


1 See Gebhardt and Harnack, op. cit., Prolegg. xi. n. 2. 


‘* WERMAS” AND “ HERMES ” 379 


Tue DEPENDENCE THEORY TO BE USED WITH 
CAUTION 


It would, however, in my opinion be a grave mistake 
to push the theory of literary dependence too far, and 
to seek to account for the main content of “Hermas” 
on any theory of direct borrowing from allied sources, 
or even solely of direct external conditioning by the 
mystical and theological ideas of the time. There is 
no @ priori reason against the high probability that 
the original writer was recording some genuine inner 
experiences, however much, as was the fashion of the 
time, and of other times and climes, they may have been 
expanded, interpolated, and polished by literary art. 

It is true that all such inner experiences would be 
strongly conditioned by the prior conceptions, thought- 
tone, and theological beliefs of the writer, and by the 
current and traditional types of such experiences known 
in his day. Indeed, it is very difficult anywhere to meet 
with the record of visions or apocalyptic utterances 
which are not so conditioned. The Buddhist seer, sees 
in the mode of traditional Buddhist conceptions of the 
unseen ; the Hellenic mantis and sibyl find themselves 
in an invisible world of the familiar nature known to 
them from the mythologists, and poets, and mystery- 
traditions; the Egyptian prophet moves amid the 
familiar topography and schematology of the Amenti 
of his nation; even an Ezekiel sees in the symbols of 
the Babylonian cultus; while the Christian mystic 
invariably finds himself in the conventional heaven of 
the saints and the hell of the sinners. 

It is not, therefore, necessary to follow Reitzenstein 
(pp. 8-11) in detail, when he seeks to show the strong 
influence of heathen mystical literature on the early 


380 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Christian document we are discussing, and to point to 
striking parallels between the setting of the first four 
visions of “ Hermas,” and the visions of Zosimus, as 
preserved in the fragments of his “ Acts,” + or the “ Visit 
to Hades” of Setme and Si-Osiri, and their passing 
through the Seven Halls,? as partially preserved in the 
Demotic “ Tales of Khamuas.” * 

It is true that Zosimus, who flourished towards 
the end of the third century, was a member of the 
Poemandres community, and, therefore, what he has 
to say is of great interest to us, for doubtless his 
visions were strongly conditioned by the Trismegistic 
tradition and especially by the Isis-type of its literature, 
and the cognate Egyptian “Books of Hermes”; but 
the points on which Reitzenstein lays stress seem 
somewhat too general to allow of our drawing any 
direct conclusion with regard to “Hermas” and 
“ Hermes.” 

There is a certain similarity; but our information 
is too scanty to permit of any precise drawing of 
general conclusions. There is, however, a valuable 
piece of information which prevents us from attribut- 
ing all the similarities which may be noticed purely 
to the general thought-atmosphere of the times. In 
one particular at least, we can be more definite. 


THE VISIONS OF CRATES 


Zosimus is not the only follower of Thrice-greatest 
Hermes whose visions are still on record. Crates also 


1 The texts are given by Berthelot (M. P.8.), Les Alchimistes 


recs. 
ee See The Book of the Dead, cxliv., cxlvii. 
3 Griffith (F. L1.), Stories of the High Priests of Memphis (Oxford, 
1900), pp. 45 ff. 


‘‘ WERMAS” AND ‘‘ HERMES ” 381 


has left an account of his mystic experiences, though 
unfortunately transmitted to us only in Arabic transla- 
tion from the original Greek. 

Crates leaves his body and enters the unseen world. 
“While I was praying,” he writes, “I felt myself 
suddenly carried into the airs [of heaven], following the 
same path as the sun and moon.” Here he meets with 
Thrice-greatest Hermes in the guise of “an old man, 
the most beautiful of men, seated on a chair; he was 
clad in white raiment, and held a book in his hand 
resting on the arm of the chair.” 

Compare this with “Hermas” (Vis. ii. 2, 2): “I see 
opposite me a chair, and on it a covering of wool white 
as hail;? then came there an old woman, in shining 
white Sihiness: having a book: in her hand, and sat 
down alone.” 

After this revelation, and when the “old woman” 
had ceased reading from the book, four young men 
came and carried off the chair, and departed with it to 
the East (ibid., 4, 1). 

Here again it is of interest to compare this with the 
introduction to a magical “light-ritual,” where the seer 
has a vision of four men with crowns on their heads 
who bring in the “ throne of the god.” 

Crates is taught from the book and bidden to write 
what he is told. ‘“ Make thy book according to the 
instructions which I have given; and know that I am 
with thee and will never leave thee till thou hast 
accomplished all.” 

So also “Hermas”; compare also the last sentence 

1 Berthelot (M. P.S.), La Chimie au Moyen Age, iii. 44 ff., 268, 
n. 1; R. 361. 

2 According to the Ethiopic translation. See The Apostolic 
Fathers, p. 325, n. 4, in the “ Ante-Nicene Christian Library,” 
vol. i. (Edinburgh, 1867). 

3 Kenyon (F. G.), Greek Pap. Cat., p. 65; R. 280, n. 3. 


382 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


with the phrase in the Introduction to the “ Pastoral 
Hermas”: “I am sent... that I may dwell with 
thee for the rest of the days of thy life.” 

In another vision, Crates is instructed in a dialogue 
which strongly reflects the style and substance of our 
Trismegistic sermons. And in yet another he moves in 
the psychic reflection of the setting of the now for the 
most part lost Isis-type of the literature, which has a more 
strongly Egyptian colouring. He is transported to yet 
another heaven and firmament, and there sees the temple 
of Ptah (Hephestus), and the statue of Venus (Isis), 
which holds converse with him, 

He was then evidently saturated with the Tris- 
megistic tradition, and had access to treatises which 
are now, unfortunately, lost to us, for it is just this type 
of the literature which shows signs of the more direct 
influence of Egyptian ideas, and the mention of the 
temple of Ptah is a striking confirmation that Reitzen- 
stein is on the right track in his analysis of the oldest 
deposit of the “ Poemandres,” which he connects with 
the Ptah-tradition. 


THE GENERAL CHRISTIAN “MANY” AND THE 
Gnostic “Frew” 


That the end and aim of the later Egyptian religion, 
and of all Hellenistic religious circles in general, 
was a Gnosis, or definite mystical experience in the 
form of visions and apocalypses, is manifest on all 
sides ; and that this also was the chief interest of very 
numerous circles in the Early Church is a fundamental 
fact in the study of Christian origins which should not 
be impatiently brushed on one side, or minimised 
almost to extinction as of no real importance, but 
which should be restored to the first rank in seeking 


‘“ HERMAS” AND ‘‘ HERMES ” 383 


an explanation of the many obscure problems of these 
early days which no purely objective considerations 
will solve. 

That the General Christian of these days, as of all 
subsequent centuries, had naturally much to learn in 
these matters from the trained Mystic, whether of his 
own faith or of another, is saying nothing to his dis- 
credit, for he naturally belonged to the “many” who 
were striving to become the “few.” General Chris- 
tianity, however, spread so rapidly that the definite 
cultivation of the spiritual faculties practised by the 
early contemplatives of the faith soon gave place to a 
fanatical enthusiasm for a misunderstood monkdom, 
which swamped the monasteries with a flood of the 
“many,” who were often without any true vocation for 
the holy life, and not unfrequently quite ignorant of 
the elements of contemplation. 

We need not speak of the wild fanaticism of warrior 
monkdom let loose with pick and hatchet and fire-brand 
to destroy the treasures of religious art throughout the 
beautiful Hellenic world, but even among the quiet 
and peaceable brethren there was much ignorance. 
How unknowing some of these good folk were, we may 
learn from a naive story, the very simplicity of which 
convinces the reader of its genuineness. 

Perhaps some one may here interject: But this has 
nothing to do with “Hermas”! Perhaps not; but it 
has a great deal to do with a proper understanding of 
the history of the development of General Christianity 
and its relationship to the deeper religious conscious- 
ness of the first centuries. When, then, I read the 
Greek text of this simple story, as reproduced by 
Reitzenstein,’ I thought that some who could not read 


1 R. 34—from Apophthegmata Patrum, in Cotelerius’ Eeclesie 
Grece Monwmenta, i. 582. 


384 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Greek, but who take a very deep interest in such 
matters, might like to hear it, and so I have set it down 
in English. 


THE Story or ABBOT OLYMPIUS 


The story runs as follows: 

“ Abbot Olympius? said that one day a priest of the 
[Heathen] Greeks came down to Scetis;* he came to 

my cell and passed the night there. 

“Seeing the manner of life of the monks, he saith to 
me: ‘Living in this way, do ye not enjoy visions from 
your God?’ ‘Nay!’ I answer. 

“Then saith the priest to me: ‘So long as we duly 
serve our God with holy deeds, he hideth nought 
from us, but revealeth unto us his mysteries. And 
ye, in spite of all your great labours—watchings, keep- 
ing silence, disciplines — sayest thou, ye see nought ? 
Assuredly, then, if ye see nought, ye have let evil 
reasonings come into your hearts which shut you from 
your God; and ’tis for this cause his mysteries are not 
revealed to you.’ 

“And I went and told the elder [brethren] the 
words of the priest; and they were astonished and 
agreed that so it was. For impure reasonings do shut 
off God from man.” 


I do not exactly understand what is the precise 
meaning of Aoyicuovs, which usually means “ reason- 


1 Ido not know who this Olympius was, unless, perchance, 
he may have been the monk referred to by Nilus (ii. 77), the 
famous ascetic of Sinai, who flourished in the first quarter of the 
fifth century. 

2 Again, I can find no information about this place ; it was, 
however, presumably in the Nitriote nome south of the Delta— ’ 


for the priest “ came down.” ; 


‘‘ WERMAS ” AND ‘* HERMES ” 885 


ings,” and seems on the face of it to suggest that the 
monks’ intellectual grasp of the matter was at fault. 
It may, however, mean simply that their “ thoughts” 
were impure. But this is not any more satisfactory, 
for the monks must have known already that impure 
thoughts were to be driven out. 

What is clear is that the “ priest of the Greeks” had 
personal experience of these pious exercises, and came 
from a circle where such things were normally 
practised ; he, moreover, knew what was the reason for 
the monks’ non-success in contemplation. He knew 
that it all depended on thought, and that, too, on “ good 
thought,” so that the “Good” might descend on the 
“good,” as the Hermes-Prayer (i. 9,13) says. But he 
knew more than this; he knew that there was also 
need of right thought,” of Gnosis as well as of faith, 
of the proper use of the intelligence and the driving 
out of erroneous ideas with regard to the nature of 
God. 


A Finat Worp 


But for a final word on “Hermas.” This early 
document was written at Rome; so all are agreed. It 
would, then, seem necessary to allow of sufficient time 

_for a wide circulation of the older form of the “ Pom- 
andres,” before it could reach Rome from Egypt. This 
time could not have been short, for it must be reckoned 
not by geographical considerations, which are hardly of 
any consequence in this connection, but by the fact 
that the “ Poemandres” was the gospel of a school that 
laid the greatest possible stress on secrecy. «How, then, 
could a Christian writer have got possession of a copy ? 
Had the pledge of secrecy already by this time been 
removed? This is not credible, for later Trismegistic 
documents still lay the greatest stress upon it. © 

VOL. I. 25 


386 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Were, then, the early Christian mystical writers in 
intimate relationship with such circles as the Poman- 
dres-community ? Some Gnostics undoubtedly were ; 
was the writer of “Hermas”? Was there once friend- 
ship where subsequently was bitter strife ? 

Such and many other most interesting questions 
arise, but there is little hope that any satisfactory answer 
will be given them until the work on the mystical 
religious environment of the time has been pushed 
forward to such a point, that men may gradually become 
accustomed to the view that much of the secret of the 
Origins lies concealed in that very environment. 

In any case, the way is cleared for pushing back the 
earlier “ Poemandres” document well into the first cen- 
tury, and for ranking it, therefore, as at least con- 
temporary with the earliest of the New Testament 
writings. 


XI 
CONCERNING THE AON-DOCTRINE 


“ Hear then, my son, how standeth God and All. God; 
ion; Cosmos; Time; Becoming.”—C. #., xi. (xii.) 1. 


THE ScoPE oF OUR Essay 


While rigidly excluding any consideration of the 
amazing elaboration of Christo-Gnostic sonology, it 
may not be unserviceable to offer a few notes in 
connection with the simpler idea of the AXon. The 
subject really requires a treatise in itself, but that would, 
of course, be too lengthy an undertaking for these 
Prolegomena.! 

Let us, then, first turn to a striking passage which 
purports to give us the Orphic tradition of the Genesis 
of the World-Egg, and of the relation of its Glorious 
Progeny to the Aton. 

The passage is of great interest for us in our present 
enquiry, for if it is not a direct quotation from Apion, 
the Alexandrian savant, and bitter opponent of the 
Jews and of Philo, during the first half of the first 


1 From Prof. Montet’s report (Asiatic Qr. Rev., Oct. 1904) of 
the “ Proceedings of the Second International Congress of the 
History of Religions” (Bale), Aug. 20-Sept. 2, 1904, I see that 
Reitzenstein presented a monograph on the “Aion” to the 
Congress. I do not, however, know whether this has yet been 
published, 

387 


388 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


century A.D., it at anyrate represents the view of the 
Hellenistic theology of that period. 

The passage is found in one of the sources of the 
composite and overworked document known .as the 
Clementine Homilies} and runs as follows: 


THE ORPHIC TRADITION OF THE GENESIS OF THE 
WORLD-EGG 


III. “There was when naught was but Chaos and an 
indistinguishable mixture of unordered elements still 
jumbled all together; both Nature herself being wit- 
ness to it, and great men having thought it must be so. 

“And as witness, I will bring forward for you the 
greatest of the great in wisdom, Homer himself, 
speaking about the original con-fusion: 


“ But may you all become water and earth 2— 


—meaning that thence all things have had their genesis, 
and that after the dissolution of their moist and earthy 
essence they are all restored again to their first nature 
—which is Chaos. 

“ And Hesiod, in his Theogony, says : 


“Tn truth Chaos came into being the very first.’ 
di . 
“ And by ‘came into belts he evidently means that 


1 Clement. Hom., VI. iii. ff.; ed. A. Schwegler (Stuttgart, 
1847), pp. 168 ff.; ed. P. de Lagarde (Leipzig, 1865), pp. 74 ff. 
See also Lobeck, Aglaophamus, pp. 475, 478; and my Orpheus, 
pp. 156 and 162, 163. For the latest critical view on the Apion- 
speeches, see Waitz (H.), Die Pseudoklementinen Homilien und 
Rekognitionen (Texte und Untersuchungen, Neue Folge, Bd. X. 
Hft. IV.), pp. 251-256, “ Der Dialog des Klemens mit Appion 
iiber die heidnische Mythologie.” 

2 Il, vii. 99. Of. the Earth-and-Water of C)H., i. 5. 

3 Theog., 116. 


CONCERNING THE AON-DOCTRINE 389 


it was generated as are things generable, and not that 
it for ever was as are things ingenerable. 

“ Orpheus also likens Chaos to an Egg in which was 
the con-fusion of the primordial elements. 

“This is what Hesiod supposes by Chaos, what 
Orpheus calls an Egg—a thing generable, projected 
from the infinity of Matter (Hylé), and brought into 
being as follows: 

IV. “ Both fourfold Matter? being ensouled and the 
whole Infinitude being as though it were a Depth 
(Bu@0s), flowing perpetually and indistinguishably 
moving, and over and over again pouring forth 
countless imperfect mixtures, now of one kind and 
now of another, and thereby dissolving them again 
owing to its lack of order, and engulphing so that it 
could not be bound [together] to serve for the genera- 
tion of a living creature—it happened that the infinite 
Sea itself, being driven round® by its own peculiar 
nature, flowed with a natural motion in an orderly 
fashion from out of itself into itself, as it were a 
vortex,‘ and blended its essences, and thus involuntarily 
the most developed part of all of them,’ that which 
was most serviceable for the generation of a living 
creature, flowed, as it were in a funnel, down the 
middle of the universe, and gas carried to the bottom 

' Orpheus apparently does nothing of the kind, but draws a 
distinction between Chaos and the Egg. 

* Cf. the Pythagorean Tetraktys, in the famous oath—“ The 
Fourfold Root of Ever-flowing Nature.” 

3 Or impelled or pushed in every direction. 

* Thus forming the Vortex Atom of the Cosmos. 

5 The text reads: kal ofrws @& dxoverod trav mdvrwy Td 
vootiuérarov. AS éf dxoveros has hitherto proved insoluble for 
all editors, I would suggest ef axovetov, As to vootimdéraroy, L. 
and S. are of little assistance unless it is taken in the sense of 


“ripest.” Sophocles gives “essential, valuable, perfect, the best 
part of any thing.” 


390 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


by means of the vortex that swept up everything, and 
drew after it the surrounding Spirit, and so gathering 
itself together as it were into the most productive 
[form of all], it constituted a discrete state [of things]. 

“For just as a bubble is made in water, so a sphere- 
like hollow form gathered itself together from all sides. 

“Thereupon, itself being impregnated in itself, 
carried up? by the Divine Spirit that had taken it to 
itself as consort, it thrust forth its head (apoéxuwev) 
into the Light—this, the greatest thing perchance that’s 
ever been conceived, as though it were out of the Infinite 
Deep’s universe a work of art had been conceived and 
brought to birth, an ensouled work [in form] like unto 
the circumference of eggs, [in speed] like to the swiftness 
of a wing.! 

V. “I would therefore have you think of Cronus 
(Kpovos) as Time (Xpovov *), and of Rhea (Péa) as the 
flowing (70 péov) of the Moist Essence ; for the whole 
of Matter being moved in Time brought forth, as it 
were, an Egg, the whole surrounding sphere-like Heaven 
(’Ovpaves), which in the beginning was full of the pro- 
ductive marrow,® so that it might be able to bring 
forth elements and colours of all kinds ; and yet the 


1 This probably means the Spirit that ensouled Matter; or to 
use a more familiar expression, the Spirit of Ged which “ brooded 
over the Deep.” 

2 Sc. out of the Depth of Matter or Darkness, on to the surface 
of it, where was the Light. 

3 Of. OC. H.,i. 14: “ bent. his face downwards” (rapéxvev), and 
note thereon. 

* According to Basilides the “wings” of the Sonship are the 
Holy Spirit, This symbolism is presumably to be connected with 
the Egyptian “Winged Globe.” See F. F. F., p. 26. 

5 A very ancient word-play. 

® Sometimes used for brain, Cf. C.H., x. (xi.) 11, and the Jewish 
Commentator in the Naassene Document. This is the Spermatic 
Essence of the Logos. - 


CONCERNING THE AON-DOCTRINE 391 


manifold appearances which it was ever presenting, all 
came from One Essence and One Colour. 

“For just as in the product of the peacock, although 
the colour of the egg seems to be one, it has neverthe- 
less potentially in it the countless colours of the bird 
that is to be brought to perfection, so also the Ensouled 
Egg conceived from Infinite Matter, when it is set in 
motion from the perpetually flowing Matter below it,1 
exhibits changes of all kinds. 

“For from within the circumference a certain male- 
female Living Creature is imaged out by the Fore- 
knowledge of the Divine Spirit that indwells in it, 
whom ? Orpheus doth call Manifestor (@avns—Phanés), 
because when he is manifest (¢ave’s) the universe shines 
forth from him, through the lustre of Fire, most 
glorious of elements, perfected in the Moist [Element]. 

“ Nor is this incredible, for in the case of glow-worms, 
for example, Nature allows us to see a ‘ moist light.’ 

VI. “ Accordingly the First Egg that was ever pro- 
duced being gradually warmed by the Living Creature 
within it, breaks open, and then there takes shape and 
comes forth some such thing as Orpheus says: 


“ When the skull-like ® wide-yawning Egg did break [ete. ].4 


“So by the mighty power of Him who came forth 
and who made Himself manifest, ‘the shell’® receives 
its articulation® and obtains its orderly arrangement ; 


1 It is thought of as floating in this Matter. 

2 The Living One. 

3 xpavatov—an otherwise unknown word, Many emendations 
have been suggested ; but it does not seem to be necessary to go 
beyond xpavtoy, especially as we have seen (for instance, in the 
Naassene Document) that this was a favourite symbol of the 
Heaven. 

4 Unfortunately, the rest of the Orphic quotation is not given. 
5 Or body—the matter in the Egg. 

5 &puovtay - its fitting together, or harmony. 


392 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


while He Himself presides as though it were upon a 
throne on Heaven’s height, and in the [realms] ineffable - 
sends forth His light all round upon the Boundless 
Eon.” 


COMMENTARY 


This is evidently the Logos—the God from the Egg, 
and the God from the Rock; for the Primal Firmament 
was symbolised as Rock, as Adamant; just as in 
physical nature, the life-spark appears from the mineral 
kingdom. 

The Logos presides in highest heaven, in the ineffable 
spaces, whence He sends out His rays upon the on, 
that Bound of Bounds which is itself Boundless. For 
the Egg may be thought of as the Boundary of some 
special universe or system; whereas the Aton is the 
Boundary of all universes. 7 

The information given in this quotation purports to 
be the Orphic tradition of cosmogony; with this cos- 
mogony all Hellenistic theologians would be familiar, 
and therefore we are not surprised to find many points 
of contact between it and the general ideas in our 
“ Poemandres” cosmogenesis, which, though doubtless 
having an original nucleus of Egyptian tradition in it, 
is nevertheless strongly overworked by minds that were 
also saturated with the mingled traditions of Plato, 
Pythagoras, and Orpheus. 

Indeed, both “Plato” and ‘“ Pythagoras,” on their 
mystical side, are strongly tinged with “Orpheus.” 
Now, Orphicism was the revival of pre-Hesiodic Orphism 
initiated by Onomacritus under the Peisistratide. 
Original Orphism was, in my opinion, a blend of Hellenic 
Bardic lore with “Chaldean” elements. It is not sur- 
prising, therefore, that when the “Books of the Chal- 
deans,” collected for the Alexandrian Library, were 


CONCERNING THE AON-DOCTRINE 393 


turned into Greek, great interest should have been 
taken in them by Hellenistic scholars, who found therein 
a confirmation of the Greek Wisdom of Orpheus, little 
suspecting that that Wisdom was in origin partially 
from the same source. 


THE SETHIAN GNOSIS 


In illustration of this Chaldso-Orphic symbolical 
cosmogony as “ philosophised” in a Hellenistic Gnostic 
environment, we will quote from a system ascribed by 
Hippolytus to the Séthians (a name indicating an 
Egyptian environment), and brought by him into the 
closest connection with those whom he calls the 
Naassenes—that is to say, with what he considers to be 
one of the earliest forms of the Christian,Gnosis, but 
which, as we have shown, is a form of the pre-Christian 
Gnosis overworked in Christian terms about the middle 
of the second century. Of these Séthians, Hippolytus ! 
tells us as follows: 

“They think that there are Three Principles? of the 
universals having certain definite boundaries, and yet 
that each of these Principles possesses boundless 
potentialities. 

- “Now, the Essences of these Principles (he says) are 
Light and Darkness; and in the midst of these is pure 
Spirit. 

“The Spirit, however, that is set in the midst of the 
Darkness that is below and of the Light that is above, 
is not a spirit [or breath] like a blast of wind or some 
light breeze that can be felt; but is as it were the 
delicate scent of unguent or of incense compounded and 


1 Philos., v.19; ed. C., p. 209 ff.; ed. D. and S., pp. 198 ff. ; ed. 
M., 138 ff. 
2 apxds—sources or beginnings. 


394 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


prepared,—a force of fragrance that travels with a 
motion so rapid as to be quite inconceivable and far 
beyond the power of words to express. 

“Now, since Light is above and Darkness below, and 
Spirit in some such way as I have said between them, 
—the Nature of the Light is that it shines forth from 
above, like a ray of the sun, into the Darkness beneath, 
while that of the fragrance of the Spirit, which has the 
middle rank, is, contrary wise, that it extends itself and 
is carried in every direction; just asin the case of in- 
cense on a fire, we see its fragrance carried in every 
direction. 

“And such being the Power of the triply divided 
[Principles], the combined Power of the Spirit and Light 
descends into the Darkness which is set beneath them. 

“ And the Darkness is an awesome Water into which 
the Light together with the Spirit is drawn down and 
transferred. 

“The Darkness, however, is not without under- 
standing, but quite intelligent, and it knows that if 
Light were taken from Darkness, Darkness would 
remain isolated, unmanifest,) splendourless, powerless, 
ineffectual, strengthless. 

“Wherefore is it constrained with all its intelligence 
and understanding to hold down to itself the lustre and 
spark of the Light together with the fragrance of the 
Spirit. 

“ And one can see an image of the nature of the 
latter in a man’s face—[namely] the pupil of the eye, 
which is dark because of the waters underlying it, yet 
illumined by Spirit. 

“As, therefore, the Darkness contends for the 
Splendour, in order that it may make a slave of the 


1 &¢avés—the opposite of Phanes. 
2 Have we here any further clue to the title Képn Kéopov 3 


CONCERNING THE ASON-DOCTRINE 895 


Light-spark and see, so also the Light and the Spirit 
contend for their own Power; they strive to raise 
and bring back to themselves those powers which 
are mingled with the dark and awesome Water 
beneath. 

“Now all the powers of the three Principles, being 
infinitely infinite in number, are sagacious and intelli- 
gent each according to its own essence. And though 
they are countless in multitude, yet, being sagacious 
and intelligent, as long as they remain by themselves, 
they are all at peace. 

“Tf, however, one power is brought into contact with 
another power, the dissimilarity in their juxtaposition 
brings about a certain motion and energy that takes 
its shape from the concurrent motion of the juxta- 
position of the contacting powers.! 

“For the con-currence of the powers constitutes as 
it were the impression (ru7zros) of a seal struck off by 
concussion? so as to resemble the [die] that stamps 
the substances brought into contact with it. 

“Since then the powers of the three Principles are 
infinite in number, and from the infinite powers are 
infinite concurrences, images of infinite seals are of 
necessity produced. 

“These images, then, are the forms (ida) of the 
different kinds of living creatures. 

“Now from the first mighty concurrences of the 
three Principles there resulted a mighty type of seal— 
Heaven and Earth. 

“And Heaven and Earth have a configuration 


1 I may be mistaken, but the ideas involved in this exposition 
seem to be precisely the same as those involved in the most 
modern dynamic theories of atomicity, except that the atoms or 
rather monads of our Gnostics are intelligent. 

2 Lit., con-currence, 


396 THRICE-GREATEST HERMKS 


resembling a Womb, with the embryo! in the middle; 
and if (he says) one would bring this to the test of 
sight, let him scrutinise scientifically the gravid womb 
of whatsoever living creature he wishes, and he will 
find the model of Heaven and Earth and of all things 
between them lying before him without any alteration. 

“So the configuration of Heaven and Earth was such 
that it resembled a Womb as it were, according to the 
first concourse [of the three Principles]. 

“ And again in the midst of Heaven and Earth infinite 
concourses of powers occurred, and every single con- 
course effected and expressed the image of nothing else 
but a seal of Heaven and Earth—a thing resembling a 
Womb. 

“ And in the Earth itself there developed from the 
infinite seals of different kinds of living creatures, 
[living things] still more infinite. 

“ And into all this infinity below the Heaven in the 
different kinds of living creatures, the fragrance of the 
Spirit from above together with the Light was sown 
and was distributed.? ... 

“ Accordingly there arose out of the Water a first- 
born source—Wind vehement and _boisterous—and 
cause of all genesis. 

“For by making a certain seething® in the waters 
it * raises up waves from the waters. 

“And the genesis of the waves, being as it were a 


1 Lit., navel ; but the word stands metaphorically for anything 
like a navel—e.g. the boss of a shield, a knob of any kind ; hence 
any centre, or nucleus, 

* Hippolytus here seems to have omitted some important 
section of his source from his summary ; in any case the text of 
that which follows is very corrupt, and in some important details 
demonstrably imperfect, as may be seen by comparing the 
Epitome, X. iv. 

3 Or ferment. * Sc. Wind. 


CONCERNING THE ASON-DOCTRINE 397 


certain pregnant! impulse, is the source of the produc- 
tion of man or mind, whenever [this motion] quickens 
under the impulse of the Spirit. 

“ And whenever this wave, raised from the Water by 
the Wind, and rendering nature pregnant, receives in 
itself the power of production of the female, it keeps 
down the Light from above that has been sown into it 
together with the fragrance of the Spirit,—that is to 
say, mind that takes forms in the various types; that 
is a perfect god, brought down from the Ingenerable 
Light from above and Spirit into a human nature, as 
into a temple, by the course of Nature and motion of 
the Wind, generated from Water, commingled and 
blended with bodies, as though he were the salt of 
existing things and the light of the Darkness, struggling 
to be freed from bodies, and unable to find liberation 
and the way out of himself. 

“For as it were a very minute spark... like a 
Pay ess 

“Every thought and care of the Light above, there- 
fore, is how and in what way mind may be liberated 
from the Death of the evil and dark Body,’ from the 
Father below, who is the Wind that in ferment and tur- 
moil raised up the waves and brought to birth perfect 
mind, son-of himself, and yet not his own in essence, 

“ For he was a ray from above, from that Perfect Light, 
overpowered in the sinuous* and awesome and bitter ® 


1 éyxijpov—a play on «ua, which means embryo as well as wave. 

2 The text is here destroyed beyond hope of conjecture, 

8 Sc. Darkness, 

4 goa. Cf. the cxodrdés of C. H., i. 4. 

5 Of. the Naassene Hymn: “She seeks to flee the bitter 
Chaos” ; and compare Jacob Bohme’s “ Bitterness,” and also his 
“three Principles,” with those of our system. The analogies are 
striking, and yet Jacob could not possibly have known this 
system physically. 


~ 


398 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


and blood-stained Water; and that Light is the Spirit 
of Light borne upon the water.) ... 

“But the Wind, being both boisterous and vehement 
in its rush, is in its whistling? like unto a Serpent—a 
winged one. 

“From the Wind, that is from the Serpent, the 
source of generation arose in the way that has been 
said; all things receiving together the beginning of 
generation. 

“When then (he says) the Light and the Spirit have 
been received down into the impure and disorderly 
Womb of manifold suffering, the Serpent—the Wind of 
the Darkness, the First-born of the Waters—entering 
in generated man, and the impure Womb neither loves 
nor recognises any other form.® 

“ And so the Perfect Logos of the Light from above 
having made Himself like unto the Beast, the Serpent, 
entered into the impure Womb, having deceived it‘ 
through His similitude to the Beast; in order that 
He may loose the bonds that are laid upon the per- 
fect mind that is generated in the impurity of the 
Womb by the First-born of the Water—Snake, Wind, 
Beast. 

“This (he says) is the Servant’s Form;° and this is 


1 The following lines are destroyed beyond the power of 
reconstruction. 

2 In the case of a serpent this would be “hissing”; ovpryua, 
however, is properly the sound of a pipe, and puts us in mind of 
the Syriktés of the Naassene Document, 

3 Sc. than that of the Serpent. 

4 Sc. the Womb. 

5 Of. Philipp., ii.'7: ‘‘ But He emptied Himself, taking on the 
Servant’s Form, being made in the likeness of men.” The 
“emptying” or kévwo1s was the change from the wAfpwpua or 
Fullness of Light to the xévwga or Emptiness of Darkness. Paul 
(or the writer of the Epistle, whoever he was) is here using the 
technical language of the Gnosis. 


CONCERNING THE AON-DOCTRINE 399 


the necessity of the Descent of the Logos of God into 
the Womb of the Virgin. 

“But it is not sufficient (he says) that the Perfect 
Man, the Logos, has entered into the Womb of the 
Virgin and loosed the pains that are in that Darkness ; 
nay, but after entering into the foul mysteries in the 
Womb, He washed Himself and drank the Cup of 
Living Water bubbling-forth—a thing that everyone 
must do who is about to strip off the Servant-Form and 
put on the Celestial Garment.” 


There can be little doubt but that the main ideas 
in the background of this system of the Gnosis are 
closely connected with general Orphic and Chaldean 
ideas, and also with the main schematology of our 
“ Poemandres ” tractate. : 

From the Orphic tradition handed on by Apion we 
have seen that the AZon is the Circle of Infinitude and 
Eternity illumined by the Logos, 


THE “ Mrrartac Lon” 


The whole of this Orphic lore (in other words, the 
Chaldean wisdom-teaching) seems to me to be summed 
up in one division of the symbolism of the Mithra-cult, 
as may be seen by an inspection of the monuments 
reproduced by Cumont, and especially those of the 
mysterious figure which he calls “la divinité léonto- 
céphale,’ and the birth of the God from the Rock; this 
seems to point, as we might very well suspect, to a 
strong Chaldean element in the Mithriac tradition. 

Cumont! tells us that although some scholars have 
rejected the name of “ Mithriac Alon,” which was 


1 Textes et Monuments Figurés relatifs aux Mysteres de Mithra 
(Bruxelles, 1899), i. 76 ff., where all the references are given. 


400 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


given by Zoéga to this awe-inspiring mystic figure, 
in his opinion (and he knows more of the subject 
than any other authority) it may very well have 
been actually called Aton in the sacred books of the 
mysteries. 

If, however, this was the case, the mystic meaning, 
says Cumont, was of such a nature that it was concealed 
from the profane. 

Our classical authorities inform us that the Magi 
expressed the name of the Supreme God, which was in 
reality ineffable, by various substitutes. The general 
name for the Mystery Deity was Cronus, and Cronus 
in the sense of Time. 

“The Mithriac Cronus is a personification of Time, 
and this fact, which is now fairly established, permits 
us immediately to determine the identity of this pseu- 
donymous God. 

“There is only one Persian divinity which he can 
possibly represent, and that is Zervan Akarana, Infinite 
Time, whom, from the time of the Achemenides, a sect 
of the Magi placed at the origin of things, and from 
whom they would have both Ormuzd and Ahriman to 
have been born. 

“Tt was this God that the adepts of the mysteries 
placed at the head of the celestial hierarchy, and con- 
sidered as the first principle; or, to put it differently, 
it was the Zervanist system that the Mazdeans of Asia 
Minor taught to the Western followers of the Iranian 
religion.” 

This all seems to me to point not to a Persian origin 

1 A Being with lion’s head, and eagle’s wings, and brute’s 
feet, and human body, enwrapped with a serpent, standing 
on a globe and holding the keys of life and death in its 
two hands. There are many variants, however, all of them highly 


instructive, as pourtraying the Autozoon, or Living Creature in 
itself, the summation of all forms of life, including man. 


CONCERNING THE ASON-DOCTRINE 401 


of the AZon, as Cumont. supposes, but to a Chaldean 
element dominating the Mithriac form of the Magian 
tradition. 


PROBABLE DATE OF ORIGIN OF THE HELLENISTIC 
Aton- DocTRINE 


Now the Chaldean and Egyptian wisdom-cultures 
had many root-ideas in common (were they not 
regarded by the Greeks as the wisdom-traditions par 
excellence ?); we are not therefore surprised to find 
that Egypt, with its ever-recurring grandiose mystery- 
phrases of enormous time-periods, such as “He of the 
millions of years,” had on its own soil a highly de- 
veloped idea of Eternity and of Eternities—that is, of 
the Aion and of the Mons; and indeed the strongly 
Egyptian forms of the Gnosis, which we have preserved 
to us under Christian overworking, are involved in the 
most complex zonology. 

It seems, however, almost as though the evidence 
suggests that this Egyptian element had been revivified, 
and rescued from the oblivion in which it had been 
buried in a decadent age, in the symbolism of an almost 
forgotten past, by a stream of Chaldean ideas that 
poured into Hellenistic circles in the early Alexandrian 
period. When precisely the Afon-idea forced itself 
upon the philosophic mind of Alexandrian thinkers 
as an unavoidable mystic necessity, it is difficult 
to say with any certainty. It can, however, be said 
without fear of serious contradiction that it may 
have done so from early Ptolemaic times, and with 
certainty that it did so in the first century B.C. as 
truly as in the first century A.D. 

That the term AXon was in frequent use in the 


1 Reitzenstein (p. 276) is also of this opinion. 
VOL. I. 26 


402 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


popular Hermes-cult may be seen in Hermes-Prayer 
v. 4, where Thoth is characterised as the “Aton of the 
Eons who changes himself into all forms in visions,” 
So also in Prayer viii. 2, the Good Daimon, who has 
different names given him in the different hours, is 
called “ Wealth-giving Aton.” So also with Isis, who 
is called Wisdom and Aton in the Papyri.t 

In conclusion, we may glance at what Reitzenstein 
(pp. 272 ff.) has to say concerning this “Aionenlehre.” 


ABRAXAS 


The name Abraxas, which consisted of seven elements 
or letters, was a mystery-designation of the God who 
combined in himself the whole power of the Seven 
Planets, and also of the Year of 365 days, the sum of 
the number-values of the letters of Abraxas working 
out to 365. This mysterious Being was the “ Year”; 
but the Year as the Eternity, also conceived of \in a 
spatial aspect, as the Spirit or Name that extends from 
Heaven to Earth, the God who pervades and full-fills 
the Seven Spheres, and the Three Hundred and Sixty- 
five Zones, the Inner God, “ He who has His seat within 
the Seven Polese—AEHIOYQ,” as the Papyri have it, 
and also without them, as we shall see. 

The mysterious formula “the Name of which the 
figure is 365” meets us in such connections, that it 
cannot be taken to mean simply the “ Year-God,” but 
is a synonym of the Highest God, a secret, mysterious 
Being. In brief it was, as we have seen, no other than 
the Lion-headed God, called in Greek AZon. 

Indeed, we know from Philo of Byblos? that, at least 
in his day, the second half of the first century a.D, (and, 


1 R. 270. 
2 Ap. Euseb., Prep. Evang., I. 10, 7; 348. 
» rep 


TS ee oe ee 


CONCERNING THE AON-DOCTRINE 403 


for all we know, prior to it), there were in Pheenicia 
communities of the AlXon—of the Highest and Super- 
celestial One. 


THe FEAST OF THE ALON 


The first dated use of the word in a religious sense is 
found in Messala (who was Consul, 53 B.c.), as Johannes 
Lydus tells us. Moreover, Lydus informs us that the 
Ancients (of ada) celebrated a Feast of the Afon on 
January 5th.2 This can be no other than the Feast of 
which Epiphanius gives us such interesting details in 
treating of the Epiphany, when he writes, after de- 
scribing the festival in the Koreion at Alexandria :® 

“ And if they are asked the meaning of this mystery, 
they answer and say: To-day at this hour the Maiden 
(Koré), that is the Virgin, has given birth to the Aton.” + 

In the next paragraph Epiphanius designates this 
ion as the Alone-begotten. Here, then, we have 
striking evidence that in its Egyptian environment the 
cult of the Aton was associated with mystery-rites 
reminding us strongly of the symbolism of the Christ- 
mystery. 


THE QUINTESSENCE AND THE Monap 


Moreover, Messala® tells us of this AZon, that He 
“who made all things and governs all things, joined 


1 De Mens., iv. (ed. Wiinsch, p. 64, 6). 

2 Or rather 6th. Reitzenstein’s (p. 274) gloss (xpd «ldav) to 
ém) ris méumrns, is erroneous, for this would make the date 
January 11th. 

3 For a translation of the passage, see the Commentary on the 
K. K, Excerpts in treating of the term “ Virgin of the World.” 

4 Epiphanius, Haer., li. 22; ed. Dindorf, ii. 483. Cf. D. J. L., 
pp. 410 f., “ The Crucifixion and Resurrection Mystery-Rite.” 

5 Quoted by Macrobius, Saturnal., 1. ix. 


404 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


together by means of the surrounding Heaven the 
power and nature of Water and Earth, heavy and 
downward, flowing down into the Depth, and that of 
Fire and Spirit, light and rushing upward to the 
measureless Height. It is this mightiest power of 
Heaven that hath bound together these two unequal 
powers.” 

Lydus (2bid.) furthermore tells us that the idea of 
the AZon was associated by the Pythagoreans with the 
idea of the Monad; indeed, they seem to have derived 

the word aién from /a, the Ionic form of péa (one). 

Any attempt to refer this Pythagorean identification 
to the earlier Pythagoreans would be at once rejected 
by the majority of scholars, but I believe myself that 
the original Pythagoreans were far too close to the 
Borderland between mythology and philosophy not 
to have personified or at least substantialised their 
“Numbers” and the Source of them. At anyrate it 
is highly instructive to find Plato himself writing in 
the Zimeus: 


THE ALON IN PLATO 


“ And when the Father who begot it [the Cosmos] saw 
that by its motion and its life it had become a likeness 
of the Everlasting Gods, He marvelled, and in delight 
determined further to make it still more like its 
Original. And as the latter is an Everlasting Living 
Being, He sought to make this [Sensible] Universe as 
far as possible like it. 

“Now the nature of the Living Being was eternal 
(aiévios—eonian); but to bestow this quality entirely 
on a generable creature was not possible. 

“ Accordingly He determined to make a moving 


1 That is, the Ideal Cosmos. 


CONCERNING THE ASON-DOCTRINE 405 


image of Eternity (Adwvos); and so in setting the 
Heaven in order He makes it an everlasting (aiwov) 
image, moving according to number, of Eternity (A/avos) 
that rests in One—an image which we have, you know, 
called Time.” + 

Here it is very plain that AZon is not Time, but the 
Paradigm thereof—Eternity. It is the Consummation 
of the Eternal Gods—namely, the Plérdma, the Monad 
par excellence. We, therefore, find already in Plato the 
idea of the Aon fully developed. Did Plato “invent” 
it? Or did he put an already existing idea into philo-- 
sophical terms? He presumably found it already 
existing. Was it then Orphic (Pythagorean), or did he 
learn of it in Egypt? Who shall say precisely ? 


CONCERNING THE HELLENISTIC ORIGIN OF ALONOLOGY 


Seeing, however, that we find the idea of the Aton 
fully developed in Plato, and seeing that Plato was, so 
to speak, scripture for our Hermetic writers, it is 
exceedingly puzzling that we should find it apparently 
introduced at a certain stage into the Trismegistic 
literature as a new doctrine. 

It may be, however, that those who had followed 
Plato on purely philosophical lines had hitherto paid 
little attention to the idea of the A®on, except as an 
ultimate principle beyond the reach of speculation. 
When, however, the enthusiastic seership of mysticism 
dared to soar beyond heaven into the Heaven of heavens, 
and so to divide the Simplicity into an Infinitude of 
Multiplicity, the term Afon came to be used no longer 
for a transcendent unity but as the connotation of 
a grade of Being. 


1 Tim., 37 ©, D. 


406 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


It may then have been that our Hermetic writers 
reasserted the use of the term in its simpler philosophic 
meaning as a check to over-enthusiastic speculation. 

But even if it were a reaction against a too great 
luxury of speculation, it must have been contem- 
poraneous with the development of zonology; so that 
in any case C. H. xi. (xii.) must be dated from this point 
of view. 

When zonology arose we cannot say precisely; but 
zonology in the Gnostic sense of the term was, as we 
have seen, to some extent at least existing as early as 
the earliest Christian documents. 


THE AXON THE LOGOS 


Now though the Trismegistic tractate C. H., xi. (xii.) 
is evidently in literary contact with the Timeus,' it 
nevertheless purports to give more “esoteric,” or at any 
rate more precise, instruction than is to be found in 
Plato’s famous cosmogonical treatise. It does not 
follow Plato, but hands on an instruction that has 
already been formulated in a precise and categorical 
fashion. The ladder of existence is God, AXon, Cosmos, 
Time, Genesis ;—each following one from the other. 

/Eon is the Power of God (§ 3), whereas Cosmos is 
God’s creation and work (§§ 3, 4). The Aon, standing 
between God and Cosmos, is the Paradigm, and so also 
the Son of God (§ 15), and the final end of man is that 
he should become Aon (§ 20)—that is, Son of God. Zon 
is thus evidently the Logos of God, or the Intelligible 
Cosmos,as distinguished from the Sensible Cosmos, This 


1 Gf. § 1: “As many men say many things, and these diverse 
about the All and Good” ; and Tim., 290: “If then, O Socrates, 
since many men say many things about the Gods and the 
genesis of the All.” 


AP be A 
= ee 


CONCERNING THE ZON-DOCTRINE 407 


Eon is the Fullness in which ali things move, and 
chiefly the Seven Cosmoi (§ 7). 


THE RoMAN SACULUM-CULT DERIVED FROM EcypT 


Now, Reitzenstein (pp. 274 ff.) shows very clearly 
that the Cult of the Seculum or Aon was strongly 
developed in Roman theology in at least the first 
century B.C. This is too early a date for us to assign this 
development to the influence of the Mithras-cult. Can 
it then be that Rome was influenced by Egypt? Such 
at anyrate is Reitzenstein’s opinion (p. 277), who points 
to the fact that Messala, who is fully imbued with the 
£on-idea, was a contemporary of Nigidius, the most 
learned of the Romans after Varro, and a Pythagorean 
philosopher of high attainments. Now it is remarkable 
that in his work, De Sphera Barbarica, Nigidius treats 
of the Egyptian Sphere. 


THE AXonIc IMMENSITIES OF Ecypt 


Egypt, as we have already remarked, at a very early 
date arrived at the idea of eternal or at anyrate of 
enormously long periods of time, and had symbolised 
this conception in a primordial syzygy or pair of Gods. 
Indeed, the names of the primordial Time-pair, Hhw 
(Hehu) and Hht (Hehut), are immediately derived from 
“ Hh,” generally translated “Million,” but by Brugsch and 
others as Aion! All the Egyptian Gods were Lords of 
the Eternity or of the Eternities. But not only so, the 


1 Budge (op. cit., i. 285) writes: “ According to the late Dr 
Brugsch (Religion, p. 132), the name Heh is connected with the 
word which indicates an undefined and unlimited number, 1. 
heh ; when applied to time the idea suggested is ‘ millions of years,’ 
and Heh is equivalent to the Greek aléy.” 


408 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


term “eternity” was used in connection with definite 
time-periods; for instance, “in a million (or eternity) of 
thirty year periods.” And again: “ Thy kingdom will 
have the lastingness of eternity and of infinitely many 
hundred-and-twenty-year periods; ten millions of thy 
years, millions of thy months, hundred-thousands of 
thy days, ten-thousands of thine hours.” ! 

Here we must remark the numbers 120 (that is 
12x10) and 30; all essential numbers of the Gnostic 
Plérdma of AZons. 

It is also of interest in connection with the Time-pair, 
to note that Horapollo, the Alexandrian grammarian, 
tells us that the Egyptians when they desire to express 
the idea of Aton write “sun and moon”? (i, 1), and 
when they want to write “year” they draw “ Isis,” 
that is “ woman” (i. 3). 

We thus see that in Egypt there were ons of 
Periods or Years, and Years of AXons. Above all these 
ruled the God of the Atons, the highest God of many a 
mystic community. 


A Sone oF PRAISE TO THE ALON 


And so we read the following song of praise to the 
Eon, inscribed on a “secret tablet” by some unknown 
Brother of a forgotten Order :. 

1. “Hail unto Thee, O thou All-Cosmos of «ethereal 
Spirit! Hail unto Thee, O Spirit, who doth extend 
from Heaven to Earth, and from the Earth that’s in 
the middle of the orb of Cosmos to the ends of the 
Abyss! 

2. “ Hail unto Thee, O Spirit who doth enter into me, 
who clingeth unto me or who doth part thyself from 


1 Brugsch, Worterbuch, vi. 839. 
2 The usual symbols for “ everlasting.” 


CONCERNING THE ASON-DOCTRINE 409 


me, according to the Will of God in goodness of His 
heart! 

3. “Hail unto Thee, O thou Beginning and thou 
End of Nature naught can move! Hail unto thee 
thou vortex of the liturgy! unweariable of [Nature's] 
elements ! 

4, “ Hail unto Thee, O thou Illumination of the solar 
beam that shines to serve the world. Hail unto Thee, 
thou Disk of the night-shining moon, that shines un- 
equally! Hail, ye Spirits all of the ethereal statues 
[of the Gods]! 

5. “Hail to you [all], whom holy Brethren and holy 
Sisters ought to hail in giving of their praise! 

6. “O Spirit, mighty one, most mighty circling and 
incomprehensible Configuration of the Cosmos, celestial, 
ethereal, inter-zthereal, water-like, earth-like, fire-like, 
air-like, like unto light, to darkness like, shining as 
do the stars,—moist, hot, cold Spirit ! 

7. “I praise Thee, God of gods, who ever doth restore 
the Cosmos, and who doth store the Depth away ? upon 
its throne of settlement no eye can see, who fixest 
Heaven and Earth apart, and coverest the Heaven 
with thy golden everlasting (aiwvias) wings, and 
makest firm the Earth on everlasting thrones! 

8. “Thou who hangest up the Aither in the lofty 
Height, and scatterest the Air with thy self-moving 
blasts, who mak’st the Water eddy round in circles! 

9. “O Thou who raisest up the fiery whirlwinds, and 
makest thunder, lightning, rain, and shakings of the 
earth, O God of AXons! Mighty art thou, Lord God, O 
Master of the All!” % 


1 Or service—Ac:roupyia. 

2 @noavptoas—or treasure away. 
_ 8 Wessely, Denkschr. d. K. K. Akad. (1888), p. 72, ll. 1115 ff. ; 
R. 277, 278. 


410 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Here there is no separation of God as intra-cosmic 
and extra-cosmic ; He is both the one and the other. 
He is both the Fullness of the Godhead and also the 
Fullness of Cosmos. He is both the Cosmos, and He 
who is above the Cosmos and below the Cosmos.! 


THE DeEmiuRGIC ALON 


Reitzenstein (p. 278), referring to our Trismegistic 
tractate, C. H., xi. (xii.), points to the distinction made 
between Aton and God on one side and Aon and 
Cosmos on the other. This, he thinks, shows signs of 
the influence of a fundamental trait of Hellenistic 
theology which makes the Demiurge the Second 
God. 

However this may be, there certainly was a distinc- 
tion drawn between the Creative, or rather Formative, 
God and the Supreme Deity, in many a Christian 
Gnostic System, and not unfrequently of a very dis- 
paraging nature to the former. Already in Jewish 
mystic and philosophic (Gnostic) circles a distinction 
had had to be drawn between the idea of God as the 
Creator God, and the idea of God as the Ineffable 
Mystery of Mysteries. This had been necessitated 
by the contact of the Jewish Gnostics with the old 
wisdom-ideas and with the fundamental postulates of 
Greek philosophy. 


THE Aon IN THEURGIC LITERATURE 


Many examples could be given,’ but we prefer to 
follow Reitzenstein (p. 279) in his references to the 
Magic Papyri, or Apocryphal literature of the same class, 


1 Of. R. 28 ; Hermes-Prayer, vii. 1. 
2 See my Fragments of a Faith Forgotten. 


CONCERNING THE ASON-DOCTRINE 411 


and append the translation of two striking quotations, 
as opening up an entirely novel side of the subject. 

Thus in the eighth Book of Moses, we find the 
following passage in which the Jewish Creator God is 
placed in the second rank as compared with the 
Egyptian Supreme Principle. 

“ And God, looking down unto the earth, said: LAO! 
And all stood still, and then came into being from His 
Voice a Great God, most mighty, who is Lord of all 
things, who caused to stand the things that shall be; 
and no longer was there any thing without order in the 
ethereal realms.” } 

So also in an invocation to an unknown God, most 
probably to the Spirit to whom the Brother of the 
unknown community addressed his praise-giving as 
given above—we meet with the same distinction. 

“Thee, the only and blest Father of the ons, I 
invoke with prayers like unto Cosmos !? 

“Come unto me who fillest the whole Cosmos with 
thy Breath, and dost hang up on high the Fire out of the 
Water, and dost from out the: Water separate the 
Earth. ... The Lord bore witness to thy Wisdom, 
that is the Aion, and bade thee to have strength as He 
Himself hath strength.” * 

And, later on, the Theurgist exclaims: 

“Receive my words as shafts of fire, for that I am 
God’s Man, for whom was made the fairest plasm of 
spirit, dew ° and earth.” 

He is a Man whose words are effective and bring all 

1 Dieterich, Abraxas, 184-99. 

2 That is, presumably, “ offerings of the reason,” as our tractates 
have it; or prayers that put the mind in sympathy with the true 
order of things. 

3 The Heaven Ocean. 


4 Wessely, Denkschr. d. K. K. Akad. (1888), p. 73, ll. 1168 ff. 
5 Or pure water. 


412 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


things to pass; for his “words” are compelling “acts,” 
or ‘‘ theurgic.” 

Other passages are brought forward by Reitzenstein 
(pp. 280-286) to show that the idea of the Logos or 
Eon as Second God was a fundamental conception in 
Hellenistic theology. 

This may very well have been the case in general 
Hellenistic theology; but in philosophical circles, as 
we have pointed out in treating of the Logos-idea in 
Philo, the distinction was formal and not essential. So 
also in our Trismegistic treatises, which are saturated 
with transcendental pantheistic or monistic, or rather 
panmonistic, conceptions, if the Logos or on is 
momentarily treated of as apart from Supreme Deity, 
it is not so in reality; for the Logos is the Reason of 
God, God in His eternal Energy, and the Aton is the 
Eternity of Deity, God in His energic Eternity, the 
Rest that is the Source of all Motion. 

For the fullest exposition of the Aton - doctrine in 
our Trismegistic tractates, see The Perfect Sermon, 
XXX.-XXXlL, and my commentary thereon. 


XII 


THE SEVEN ZONES AND THEIR 
CHARACTERISTICS 


“To the first zone he gives the energy of Growth and 
Waning; unto the second zone, Device of Evils now 
de-energized ; unto the third, the Guile of the Desires 
de-energized; unto the fourth, his Domineering Arro- 
gance also de-energized; unto the fifth, unholy Daring 
and the Rashness of Audacity de-energized; unto the 
sixth, Striving for Wealth by evil means deprived of 
its aggrandisement; and to the seventh zone, Ensnaring 
Falsehood de-energized.”—C. H., i. 25. 


MAcROBIUS ON “THE DESCENT OF THE SOUL FROM 
THE HeEiagHt or Cosmos TO THE DepTus or EARTH” 


Let us first turn to the commentary of Macrobius on 
the famous “ Dream of Scipio,” which Cicero introduces 
into his Republic (Bk. VI.), just as Plato appends the 
Vision of Er to his, Macrobius devotes the twelfth 
chapter of his First Book to a consideration of “ The 
Descent of the Soul from the Height of Cosmos to the 
Depths of Earth,” and professes to base himself on 
Pythagorean and Platonic traditions. His dissertation 
covers more ground than the precise subject of the 
zones with which we are more immediately concerned ; 


but as the whole scheme is of interest to our present 
413 


414 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


studies, we will append a translation of practically the 
whole chapter. 

“[ According to Pythagoras] when the Soul descends 
from the Boundary where the Zodiac and Galaxy [or 
Milky Way] meet, from a spherical form, which is the 
only divine one, it is elongated into a conical one? by 
its downward tendency. 

“ Just as the line is born from the point and proceeds 
into length out of the indivisible, so the soul from its 
point, that is ‘monad, comes into ‘dyad’—its first 
production [or lengthening]. 

“ And this is the essence which Plato in the Zimeus, 
speaking about the construction of the World-Soul, 
describes as indivisible yet at the same time divisible. 

“For just as the Soul of the World so also the soul 
of an individual man will be found in one respect 
incapable of division—if it is regarded from the stand- 
point of the simplicity of its divine nature—and in 
another capable [of division ]—since the former is diffused 
through the members of the world, and the latter 
through those of a man, 

“When then the soul is drawn towards body—in 
this first production of it—it begins to experience a 
material agitation, matter flowing into it.* 

“ And this is remarked by Plato in the Phado [when 
he says] that the soul is drawn to body staggering with 
recent intoxication,—meaning us to understand by this 


a new draught of matter’s superfluity, by which it- 


becomes defiled and gravid and so is brought down. 
“ A symbol of this mystic secret is that Starry Cup 
(Crater) of Father Bacchus placed in the space between 


1 Not into a mathematical cone, but into an egg-shaped or 
elliptical form resembling that of a pine-cone. 

2 This shows that the soul was thought of as being without or 
outside body of every kind, and body was taken into it. 


THE SEVEN ZONES AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS 415 


Cancer and Leo'—meaning that intoxication is there 
first experienced by souls in their descent by the influx 
of matter into them. From which cause also forget- 
fulness, the companion of intoxication, then begins 
secretly to creep into souls. 

“For if souls brought down to body memory of 
the divine things of which they were conscious in 
heaven, there would be no difference of opinion among 
men concerning the divine state. But all, indeed, in 
their descent drink of\ forgetfulness—some more, some 
less. 

“‘ And for this cause on earth, though the truth is not 
clear to all, they nevertheless have all some opinion 
about it; for opinion arises when memory sinks, Those, 
however, are greater discoverers of truth who have 
drunk less of forgetfulness, because they remember 
more easily what they have known before in that 
state. 

“Hence it is that what the Latins call a ‘lecture 
(lectio) the Greeks call a ‘re-knowing’ (repetita cog- 
nitio*), because when we give utterance to true things, 
we re-cognize the things which we knew by nature 
before the influence of matter intoxicated our souls in 
their descent into body. 

“ Now it is this Matter (Hylz) which, after being im- 
pressed by the [divine] ideas, fashioned every body in 
the cosmos which we see. Its highest and purest 
nature, by means of which the divinities are either 
sustained or consist,® is called Nectar, and is believed to 
be the drink of the gods; while its lower and more 


1 Of. Pistis Sophia, pp. 371 and 367. 

2 That is, presumably, avdyvwoua—a philosophical discourse, or 
sacred sermon. 

8 As distinguished from “exist.” Latin, however, is but a 
poor medium for the expression of philosophical distinctions. 


416 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


turbid nature is the drink of souls. The latter is what 
the Ancients called the River of Lethe [or Forgetfulness]. 

“The Orphic [initiates], however, suppose that 
Dionysus himself is to be understood as ‘Hylic 
Nous’1—[that Mind] which after its birth from the 
Indivisible [Mind] is itself divided into individual 
[minds]. 

“And it is for this reason that in their Mystery- 
tradition Dionysus is represented as being torn limb 
from limb by the fury of the Titans, and, after the 
pieces have been buried, as coming together again 
whole and one; for Nous—which, as we have said, is 
their term for Mind—by offering itself for division from 
its undivided state, and by returning to the undivided 
from the divided, both fulfils the duties of the cosmos 
and also performs the mysteries of its own nature. 

“The soul, therefore, having by means of this first 
weight [of matter] fallen down from the Zodiac and 
Galaxy into the series of spheres that lie below them, 
in continuing its descent through them, is not only 
enwrapped in the envelope of a luminous body,? but 
also develops the separate motions which it is to 
exercise. 

“In the sphere of Saturn [it develops] the powers 
of reasoning and theorizing *—which [the Greeks] call 
TO Aoyiorikoy and +o Oewpyrixdy; in that of Jupiter, 
the power of putting into practice—which they call ro 
mpaxrixov; in that of Mars, the power of ardent 
vehemence—which they call ro Ouycxoy; in that of the 
Sun, the nature of sensing and imagining—which they 
call tO aicOyrixov and ro gayracrixov; in that of 
Venus, the motion of desire—which they call ro 

1 yods bAucds. 

2 The augoeides. 

3 Or of contemplative reason, synthesis as opposed to analysis. 


te 


THE SEVEN ZONES AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS 417 


emtOuunrixdv; in the sphere of Mercury, the power of 
giving expression to and interpretation of feelings— 
which they call ro épuy vevrixoy; on its entrance into 
the sphere of the Moon it brings into activity ro gutiKov 
—that is, the nature of making bodies grow and of 
moving them. 

“And this [soul], though the last thing in the divine 
series, is nevertheless the first thing in us and in all 
terrestrial beings; just as this body [of ours], though 
the dregs of things divine, is still the first substance of 
the animal world. 

“ And this is the difference between terrene bodies and 
supernal—I mean those of the heaven and stars and of 
the other elements'—that the latter are summoned 
upwards to the abode of the soul, and are worthy of 
immunity from death from the very nature of the space 
in which they are and their imitation of sublimity. 

“The soul, however, is drawn down to these terrene 
bodies, and so it is thought to die when it is imprisoned 
in the region of things fallen and in the abode of death. 
Nor should it cause distress that we have so often 
spoken of death in connection with the soul, which we 
have declared to be superior to death. For the soul is 
not annihilated by [what is called] its death, but is 
[only] buried for a time; nor is the blessing of its 
perpetuity taken from it by its submersion for a time, 
since when it shall have made it worthy to be cleansed 
clean utterly of all contagion of its vice, it shall once 
_ more return from body to the light of Everlasting Life 
restored and whole.” 2 


The characteristics of the spheres given by Macrobius 
are according to their simple energies; there is no 


1 That is, the elements other than those of earth. 
2 Ed, Eyssenhardt (F.), pp. 531 ff. (Leipzig, 1893). 
VOL. I, 27 


418 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


question of good or bad; it is the “thinking” of the 
soul that conditions the use of these energies for 
beneficent or maleficent ends. 


Tue TRADITION OF SERVIUS 


Servius, however, in his Commentary on Virgil’s 
4ineid, vi. '714, hands on another tradition, in which 
the spheres were regarded as inimical to the good of 
the soul, its evil propensities being ascribed to their 
energies. Some scholars are of opinion that Virgil in 
his famous Sixth Book is largely dependent on the 
ideas of popular Egyptian theology;! however that 
may be, Servius writes as follows: 

“The philosophers tell us what the soul loses in its 
descent through the separate spheres. For which 
cause also the Mathematici imagine that our body 
and soul are knit together by the powers of the 
separate divinities, on the supposition that when souls 
descend, they bring with them the sluggishness of 
Saturn, the passionateness of Mars, the lustfulness of 
Venus, the cupidity of Mercury. and the desire for rule 
of Jupiter. And these things perturb souls, so that 
they are unable to use their own energy and proper 
powers.” 


It is to be noticed that the characteristics of the Sun 
and Moon are omitted, and this points to a doctrine in 
which Sun and Moon were treated as distinct from 
“the five.” So also in the “Books of the Saviour ” 
appended to the /Pistis Sophia document we find 
(pp. 360, 366 ff.) mention of only five planets. The 


1 Of. for instance, Maass (E.), Die Tagesgétter in Rom wnd den 
Provinzen, p. 33. See R, 53, n. 1, 


THE SEVEN ZONES AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS 419 


tradition of this doctrine is exceedingly obscure,) and 
does not immediately concern us, as our text works on a 
“seven ” basis. 


CRITICISM OF THE EVIDENCE 


I have done my best to discover some consistent 
scheme by which the contradictory data in Macrobius, 
Servius, and Hermes might be reconciled, but the 
tabularising of their indications only makes confusion 
worse confounded. 

It is evident, however, that the main thing that 
Macrobius hands on, and which he attributes to 
Orphic-Pythagorean-Platonic tradition, contains in 
itself no suggestion that these philosophers attributed 
any evil tendencies to the characteristics of the spheres 
in themselves. The tradition of Macrobius is as 
follows: 


PE ent { 76 Bewparicdy intelligentia, 
TO NoyieTiKkov ratiocinatio, 
Jupiter TO TpakTiKOV vis agendi. 
Mars TO Oupixov ardor animositatis, 
Pe ae aio Onrixoy natura sentiendt, 
To pavtactikoy§ natura opinandi, 
Venus TO ériOuuntrixov motus desiderii. 
vis pronuntiandt 


Mercury TO EpunveuTiKoV \¢ interpretandi 
que sentiantur. 
natura plantandi 


Moon 0 ) | 
BLA at aad et agendi corpora, 


The confusion between the “vis agendi” of Jupiter 
and that of the Moon may be resolved by supposing 
that the former was the application of the reasoning 


1 For references, see R. 53, n. 2. 


420 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


faculty to the practical things of life, while the latter 
was the power of moving one’s own physical body, if 
indeed the “ et agendi” is not a gloss of Macrobius. 

Servius, on the contrary, is following a tradition in 
which the spheres were regarded as the sources of evil 
tendencies ; ethical considerations dominate the whole 
conception. Seeing, however, that it is a fivefold dis- 
tribution, we are unable to equate it with the doctrine 
of Hermes, which is sevenfold. Nevertheless, there are 
some parallels. 

The lustfulness (/ibido) of Servius is to be paralleled 
with the “guile of the desires” or “lustful error” 
(4 ériOuunrixn aratn) of Hermes. This is ascribed to 
the third zone by Hermes, and to Venus by Servius, 
Venus further coming third in Macrobius. 

The “ desire of rule” (desidertwm regni) of Servius is 
clearly the “domineering arrogance” (4 dpyovrucn 
apopavia) of Hermes. In Hermes this belongs to the 
middle zone (fourth); in Servius it is ascribed to 
Jupiter, presumably as the ruler of the age—the ruler 
of the previous age being Saturn, who has been deprived 
of his energy and so rendered “ torpid.” 

The “passion” or “wrathfulness” (¢tracundia) of 
Servius is also to be paralleled to some extent with the 
“unholy daring” of Hermes. It is ascribed to the 
fifth zone by Hermes and to Jupiter by Servius, Mars 
also coming fifth in Macrobius. 

Finally, the “love of gain ” (luert cupiditas) of Servius 
may be paralleled by the “striving for wealth by evil 
means” (ai ddopuat ai kaxat Tov mAovTov) of Hermes. 
Hermes attributes this to the sixth zone, and Servius to 
Mercury. 

The remaining quality mentioned by Servius, “ torpor,” 
which he ascribes to Saturn, equates with nothing in 
Hermes, unless we can persuade ourselves that the 


THE SEVEN ZONES AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS 421 


“ensnaring falsehood” or “falsehood that lies in wait” 
(rd évedpedov Yeidos) of Hermes has some connection 
with it. ; 

The scheme of Hermes is septenary, and connected 
with the ideas of the ascent of the soul through seven 
zones, which we must locate as seven superimposed 
atmospheres extending from the surface of the earth 
to the moon’s orbit. There is no question here of the 
Celestial Spheres proper of the Philosophers, the charac- 
teristics of the energies of which are neither good 
nor evil in themselves; nor is there apparently any 
question of the “animal soul ” proper, for the “ passions 
and desires” are said to withdraw into the “ nature 
which is void of reason.” Though nothing more is said 
about this nature in this connection, in the general 
belief of the time its dominion was thought of as located 
below the earth-surface—as a Tartarus of seven zones, 
corresponding to those above, in which the “animal 
soul” or “vehicle of desire” was thought of as being 
gradually disintegrated, its energies finally going back 
to their source in the Depths of the Darkness, while 
the process of such disintegration or metamorphosis 
produced a parallel consciousness of chastisements and 
horrors. The seven zones of our text, however, are 
apparently the region of purification of the lower 
energies of the human soul; the mental energies led 
into error by the animal passions. 


THe “Opnitt” HEBDOMAD 


Now if we turn to Salmon’s article on the “ Heb- 
domad,”! and to his discussion of the tradition of the 
“ Ophites”—a mysterious medley of chaotic elements, 
which have not yet been analysed in any satisfactory 


1 Smith and Wace’s D. of Christ. Biog., ii. 849-851. 


422 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


fashion, but which have their roots in pre-Christian 
traditions of a very varied nature within the general 
characteristic of a syncretic Gnosticism—we find that 
after treating of the Celestial Hebdomad, he continues 
as follows: 

“Besides the higher hebdomad of the seven angels, 
the Ophite system told of a lower hebdomad. After 
the serpent in punishment for having taught our first 
parents to transgress the commands of Ialdabaoth was 
cast down into this lower world, he begat himself six 
sons,! who with himself form a hebdomad, the counter- 
part of that of which his father Ialdabaoth is chief. 
These are the seven demons, the scene of whose activity 
is this lower earth, not the heavens; and who delight 
in injuring the human race on whose account their 
father had been cast down. Origen (Adv. Cels., vi. 30) 
gives their names and forms from an Ophite Diagram ; 
Michael in form as a lion, Suriel as an ox, Raphael as a 
dragon, Gabriel as an eagle, Thautabaoth as a bear, 
Erataoth as a dog, Onoel as an ass.” 

Here, I think, we are on the track of one aspect of 
a general mystery-tradition that Hermes has “ philo- 
sophized.” I say one aspect, for the “Ophite” tradi- 
tion is not a single form of tradition, but a medley of 
traditions containing a number of forms; it is a com- 
plex or syncretism of Chaldean, Persian, and Egyptian 
elements, patched together, or “ centonized,” if we may 
use the term, with Jewish industry. 


1 In Ireneus (C. Her., I. xxx. 5; ed. Stieren, i. 266) this 
sevenfold serpent is the son of Ialdabaoth (the Creative Mind), 
and is said to be “mind,” also “crooked mind,” coiled up like 
a serpent. 


THE SEVEN ZONES AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS 423 


THE SIMPLER ForM OF THE TRISMEGISTIC GNOSIS 


The wealth of symbolism and profusion of mysterious 
personifications with which these systems of subjective 
imagery were smothered, could exercise only a partial 
fascination on the clear-thinking, philosophical mind 
which had been’ trained in the method of Plato. If 
such a mind was combined with the mystic temperament, 
as was indubitably the case with the writer of our 
“ Poemandres” treatise, his main effort would be to 
simplify and categorize in the terms of philosophy at the 
expense of apocalyptic detail; nevertheless, when a man 
lived in the midst of such ideas, and was presumably in 
intimate relations with mystics and seers of all sorts, 
he could not but be strongly affected by the main 
presuppositions of all such apocalyptic, and the general 
notions of the schematology of the Unseen World, which 
all students of such matters at that period seem to 
have accepted in common. 

We thus find that our Trismegistic literature, though 
dealing throughout with the Gnosis, treats it in a far 
more simple way than any other known system of the 
time. Nevertheless, even the complex imagery of the 
Ophite schools is occasionally summed up in a few graphic 
general symbols, and these, too, representing probably 
the oldest elements in them. 


CONCERNING LEVIATHAN AND BEHEMOTH 


From the confused description by Origen? of the 
famous but exceedingly puzzling Ophite Diagram that 
both Celsus and Origen had before them, though in 
different forms, we can make out with certainty only 


1 C. Oels., VI. xxv. ff. 


424 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


that this chart of the Unseen Spaces was divided into 
three main divisions—Upper, Middle, and Lower. The 
Middle Space contained a geometrical diagram of a 
group of ten circles surrounded by one great circle. 
This Great Circle was called Levidthan, and the grouping 
of circles within it was apparently divided into a three 
and aseven. The Lower Space had in it a grouping of 
seven circles, the circles of the seven ruling daimones 
(xxx.)—elsewhere called Archontics—and the whole 
group was apparently called Béhémoth (xxv.). 

Celsus, quoted by Origen (xxvii.), tells us that the 
doctrine was that on the death of the body two groups 
of angels range themselves on either side of the soul,! 
the one set being called “ Angels of Light” and the 
other “ Archontics ”—evidently intended for “ Angels of 
Darkness.” Thus the evil soul was thought to be led 
away by the Daimones to Behemoth, and the pure soul 
to Leviathan. 

We cannot enter into the endless discussions con- 
cerning these two Great Beasts, mentioned together in 
Job xl, 15-24, and separately in Isaiah and Psalms; 
the most recent research comes to the conclusion that 
“it would seem that Leviathan was regarded as lord of 
the ocean and Béhémoth of dry land.” ? 

But in our diagram Leviathan is Lord of the Heaven- 
Ocean or Great Green or Cosmic Air, and Behemoth 
Lord of the Cosmic Earth. , 

Indeed, in the Book of Enoch} the apocalyptic writer 
associates these two monsters with precisely the same 
eschatological considerations which Origen tells us were 
the purpose of the Diagram, only “Enoch” speaks of 


1 Plainly a conflation of Persian and Chaldean ideas. 

2 Cheyne’s article, “ Behemoth and Leviathan,” in the Encyclo- 
pedia Biblica. 

3 Charles’ Trans., lx. 7 ff. (Ethiop. V., p. 155). 


THE SEVEN ZONES AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS 425 


the Last Day, while the Ophite writer has in view the 
ascent of the soul of an initiate after death. 

At the final separation of Righteous and Unrighteous, 
“Enoch” tells us, these Great Creatures, which before 
were united, will be parted. That is to say, at death 
there is a metamorphosis of the soul. 

From what is said in “ Enoch,” moreover, I deduce that 
the Upper Space of the Ophite Diagram was intended 
to represent the Celestial Paradise, that is the state of 
the Pure Mind or of the Righteous. 

Leviathan and Behemoth are figured in IV. Esdras 
vi. 49-52, as Devourers of the Unrighteous; while 
general Jewish apocalyptic in both Apocrypha and 
Talmud believed that these monsters would in their 
turn become the food of the Righteous in Messianic 
times.! 

From all these indications we deduce that Behemoth 
was the Great Beast and Leviathan the Great Fish 
The animal soul, intensified by contact with the human 
mind, then goes back to its source the Great Beast, and 
is devoured by it, and reabsorbed by it, its energies 
returning to the sum total of energies of the Great 
Animal Group-Soul, the whole energy and experience 
of which shall eventually become the “food” of the 
perfected man; that is to say, presumably, he will in 
his turn devour and so transmute these energies; the 
perfected man will thrive by transmuting the Body of 
the Great Beast into the Body of the Great Man. 

The Great Fish, however, would seem to symbolize 
the higher energies of the soul, which also require 
transmutation. In being born into the stature of the 
Great Man, the Son of Man must needs pass “ three 
days” in the Belly of the Whale. This Great Fish “is 
of the nature of knowledge; for does not Oannes come 


1 See Charles, op. cit., p. 155, n. 7. 


426 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


out of the Ocean in fish-form to teach, in the Assyrian 
Mystery-tradition, and does not the Ophite tradition in 
another of its phases* derive the inspiration of the 
great prophets of Israel, in their several degrees, from 
this same Group of Angels which the Diagram calls 
Leviathan ? 

It is also of interest to notice that Leviathan and 
Behemoth were believed to have once formed one 
monster, which was subsequently divided into male 
and female, Behemoth being male and Leviathan 
female. This reminds one of the primeval Water- 
Earth of Hermes, which was subsequently divided into 
Water and Earth, just as the animals were first of all 
male-female, and subsequently were separated. More- 
over, in the Vision of Er the arcs of the journeyings of 
the ascending and descending souls end in two orifices 
above in the sky and two below in the earth, as though 
they were the ends of a once great hollow ring or circle 
that had been divided, or as it were two serpents arched 
above and below, with mouths and tails as orifices; and, 
curiously enough, in the Pistis Sophia the souls of the 
unrighteous enter by the mouth of the Lower Dragon 
and depart by the tail. 

Now, Leviathan being female and Behemoth male, 
and both forming together as it were the circumference 
of the Great Wheel of Necessity, the Wheel of Genesis, 
the attribution of the gestation, so to speak, of the 


1 Oannes also comes to teach from the Waters of the Euphrates ; 
the Jewish overwriter of the Naassene Document (see “Myth 
of Man in the Mysteries” ) equates Euphrates with Great Jordan, 
and this with the Stream of Ocean ; and, curiously enough, Origen 
(xxviii.) ascribes the Ophite teaching to a certain Euphrates, of 
whom no one else has ever heard. It is, however, a common 
error of the Church Fathers to mistake a principle of the Gnosis 
for the founder of a heresy. 

2 See Salmon, loc. sup. cit. 


THE SEVEN ZONES AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS 427 


virtues of the soul to the one and the digesting of its 
vices to the other, is not so surprising. Further, they 
could be regarded as the right-hand or left-hand arcs 
or hemispheres of the Wheel, or Sphere, or Egg, accord- 
ing to celestial topography; whereas in Egyptian 
terrestrial parallelism the right hand was to the north 
and the left hand the south, upper and lower Egypt. 
Curiously enough, in Isa. xxx. 6, Behemoth is called the - 
monster “of the south land.” ! 

Whether or no the writer of the “ Pomandres” was 
directly influenced by the precise forms of tradition to 
which we have referred, is impossible to determine; 
but that he was influenced by the general ideas as 
symbolized is indubitable, and that he understood the 
esoteric meaning of the “hippopotamus” and “ croco- 
dile” symbols in Egyptian mysticism is highly probable. 


Tue “Fence or FIRE” 


Origen (xxxi.), moreover, tells us that, according to 
the Ophites, the consciousness of the soul after passing 
through the domain of the animal-formed Rulers, 
broke through what was called the “ Fence of Iniquity,” 
and so turned towards the higher spheres, through 
which it also had to pass. In the seventh and highest 
of them, over which ruled the Virtue which was 
called Horeus,? it addresses the Ruler thereof with an 
apology or defence of its own innocence, beginning with 
the words: “O thou who hast transcended the ‘Fence 
of Fire’ without fear!” 

This Fence of Fire was symbolised in the form of the 
Diagram which Origen (xxxiii.) had before him, as a 

1 According to Cheyne’s rendering in the above-quoted article. 


2 That is, presumably, the Horus-like ; thus showing traces of 
an Egyptian element. 


428 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


circle of fire with a flaming sword lying across its dia- 
meter. This must then have been intended to represent 
the Sphere of Fire, or Angel or Guardian of the Gate, 
which had to be passed before the Celestial Paradise 
could be entered, for the flashing, circling blade is said 
to have guarded the “ Tree of Gnosis and of Life.” 

The same idea of a typical Boundary or Fence meets 
us in the “Poemandres.” It is Man who breaks 
through the seven spheres and also their enclosing 
Sphere, the Might or Power that circumscribed the 
Fire. The root idea is the same. The point of view 
of Hermes, however, like that of the Ophite Gnostics, 
is not the passage round the Circle of Necessity of the 
souls of the unregenerate, as in the Vision of Er, but of 
the Straight Ascent of the soul of the initiate, his 
breaking through the spheres. It is the ascent of a 
soul who has reached the Hermes-stage, or Thrice- 
greatest grade, the final stage of winning its freedom, 
the Ascent after the last compulsory birth—the Ascent 
“as now it is for me” (§ 25). 


XIII 
PLATO: CONCERNING METEMPSYCHOSIS 


“ AND the soul’s vice is ignorance. For that the soul 
who hath no knowledge of the things that are, or 
knowledge of their nature, or of Good, is blinded by 
the body’s passions and tossed about. 

“This wretched soul, not knowing what she is, 
becomes the slave of bodies of strange form in sorry 
plight, bearing the body as a load; not as the ruler, but 
the ruled.”—C. #., x. (xi.) 8.1 

For the better understanding of this passage, we 
may appropriately refresh the memory of our readers 
with the Platonic doctrine of the transmigration of 
souls, as given in the Phedrus, 248 ff., using for this 
purpose the best translation we have in English, namely, 
that of Stewart,? as a basis, but often departing from it 
for greater clearness. 


THE SOUL AND HER MYSTERIES IN THE “ PHADRUS” 


“This is the life of the Gods. Of the other Souls, 
whosoever followeth God best, and is being made most 
like unto Him, keepeth the Head* of her Charioteer 


1 See commentary thereon. 

2 Stewart (J. A.), The Myths of Plato (London, 1905), pp. 
313 ff.; ¢f. also Jowett (Oxford, 1892), i. 454 ff.; and Taylor 
(London, 1804), iii. 325 ff. 

3 Of. C. H., x. (xi.) 11: “Since Cosmos is a sphere—that is to 
say, a head,” 

429 


430 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


lifted up into the Space without the firmament; so she 
is carried round with the circuit thereof, yet being 
[still] troubled with the Horses, and hardly beholding 
the Things-which-are; so she is now lifted up, now 
sinketh down, and because of the compulsion of the 
Horses, seeth some of the Things-which-are, and some 
she seeth not. 

“And the rest of the Souls, you must know, follow 
all striving after that which is above, but unable [to 
reach it], and so are carried round together and sink 
below it,? trampling upon one another, and running 
against one another, and pressing on for to outstrip one 
another, with mighty great sound of tumult and sweat. 

“And here by reason of the unskilfulness® of the 
Charioteers, many Souls are maimed, and many have 
many feathers [of their wings] broken; and all, greatly 
travailing, depart without initiation in the Sight of 
That-which-is, and departing betake them to the food 
of Opinion. 

“Now this is why there is so great anxiety to see 
the Space where is the Plain of Truth,—both because 
the pasture suited to the Best Part of the Soul groweth 
in the Meadow there, and the power of wing, whereby 
the Soul is lightly carried up, is nourished by it, and 
that the law of Adrasteia is that whatsoever Soul by 
following after God hath seen somewhat of the true 
things, shall be without affliction till its next journey 
round; and if she can always do this,* she shall be 
without hurt alway. 

1 Of. 246 B; “For’tis a Yoke of Horses that the Charioteer of 
Man’s Soul driveth, and, moreover, of his Horses the one is well 
favoured and good and of good stock, the other of the contrary 
and contrary.” 

2 Lit., under water. 


3 Lit., evil—that is, ignorance. 
4 Viz., behold the truth. 


PLATO: CONCERNING METEMPSYCHOSIS 431 


“But when through incapacity to follow [God] she 
doth not see, and, overtaken by some evil chance, filled 
with forgetfulness and wickedness, she is weighed down, 
and, being weighed down, she sheds the feathers of her 
wings and falls on to the Earth,—then is the law not 
to plant her? in her first birth in a beast’s nature; but 
to implant the Soul that hath seen most into the seed 
of one who shall become a Wisdom-lover, or a lover of 
the Beautiful, or a man who truly loves the Muses; the 
Soul that hath seen second best, into the seed of one 
who shall become a king that loveth law, and is a 
warrior and a true ruler; the Soul that hath seen third, 
unto the seed of one who shall become busied in civic 
duties, or in some stewardship, or in affairs; the one 
that hath seen fourth, into the seed of one who shall be 
a hardship-loving master of the body’s discipline or 
skilled in healing of the body; the Soul that hath seen 
fifth, into that which shall have a life connected with 
the oracles or mystic rites some way ;? unto the sixth 
a life poetic shall be joined, or that of some one or of 
another of the tribe of copiers; unto the seventh, the 
life of workman or of husbandman; unto the eighth, 
that of a sophist or a demagogue; unto the ninth, that 
of a tyrant. 

“Tn all these lives, whoever lives them righteously 
obtains a better fate ; he who unrighteously, a worse. 

“‘ Now to the selfsame state from which each Soul hath 
come, she cometh not again for some ten thousand 
years, For sooner than this period no Soul [re-]gains 


1 Sc. as a germ or seed. 

2 It is low down in the scale, indeed, that Plato places the 
soothsayers and hierophants ; he is, however, “ironical,” for he 
places poets even lower down, and still lower sophists and tyrants, 
all in keeping with his well-known views about these people as 
known in his own time. 


432 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


its wings, except the Soul of him who has loved wisdom 
naturally or contrary to nature. 

“Such Souls in the third period of a thousand years, 
if they have chosen thrice this life successively, thus 
getting themselves wings, depart in the three thou- 
sandth year.” 

“But the other Souls, when they have ended their 
first life, are brought to judgment; and being judged, 
some go to places of correction below the Earth and 
pay the penalty, while others are rewarded by being 
raised unto a certain space in Heaven where they live 
on in a condition appropriate unto the life they lived in 
a man’s form. 

“But in the thousandth year both classes come to 
the lottery of lives, and each doth make choice of its 
second life, whatever it may choose.’ 

“And now is it that a Soul that once had had a 
man’s life doth pass into a brute’s life,t and from a 


1 4 madeparthoavtos peta pirocogias—Stewart, “or loved his © 
comrade in the bonds of wisdom” ; Jowett, “or 4 lover who is not 
devoid of philosophy” ; Taylor, “or together with philosophy has 
loved beautiful forms.” I fancy that Plato has used this graphic 
expression simply to designate a man who has not true union 
with wisdom, but is seeking for union though ignorantly. 

2 “The numbers three and ten are called perfect ; because the 
former is the first complete number, and _the latter in a certain 
respect the whole of number ; the consequent series of numbers 
being only a repetition of the numbers which this contains. Hence, 
as 10 multiplied into itself produces 100, a plane number, and 
this again multiplied by 10 produces 1000, a solid number ; and 
as 1000 multiplied by 3 forms 3000, and 1000 by 10, 10,000; 
on this account Plato employs these numbers as symbols of the 
purgation of the soul, and her restitution to her proper perfection 
and felicity. Isay,as symbols ; for we must not suppose that this 
is accomplished in just so many years, but that the soul’s restitution 
takes place in a perfect manner.”—Taylor, op. ctt., iii. 325. 

8 Of. the “ Vision of Er.” 

4 We must not understand by this that the soul of a man 


PLATO: CONCERNING METEMPSYCHOSIS 433 


brute, he who was once a man, passes again into a man ; 
for that indeed the Soul that never hath seen truth, 
will never come into this configuration.! 

“For we must understand ‘man, in the sense of 
form, as one proceeding from many sensations and 
collected into a unit by means of ratiocination”2 But 
this* is recollection (avauyyow) of those things which 
our Soul once did see when she journeyed with God, 
and looked beyond the things we now call things that 
are, by raising her face ® to That-which-really-is. 

“Wherefore of right, alone the understanding of the 
Wisdom-lover hath got wings ; for he is ever engaged 
upon those things in memory as far as he can be, 
on being engaged at which, as being a God, he is 
divine. 


becomes the soul of a brute ; but that by way of punishment it is 
bound to the soul of a brute, or carried in it, just as demons 
used to reside in our souls. Hence all the energies of the rational 
soul are perfectly impeded, and its intellectual eye beholds naught 
but the dark and tumultuous phantasms of a brutal life.”—Taylor, 
loc, cit. 

1 Viz., the form of a man; it is, however, also an astrological 
term. 
2 There seems to be no agreement among translators as to the 
meaning of this sentence: Se? yap tvOpwrov Evviévar cal eldos 
Aeyduevov, éx mworddAay ly alaOhoewy els ev Aoyiou@ Evvarpoduevor. 
Stewart translates: “Man must needs understand the Specific 
Form which proceedeth from the perceiving of many things, and 
is made one by Thought;” Jowett: “For a man must have 
intelligence of universals, and be able to proceed from the many 
particulars of sense to one conception of reason ;” Taylor: 
“Indeed it is necessary to understand man, denominated ac- 
cording to species, as a being proceeding from the information 
of many senses, to a perception contracted into one reasoning 

wer.” 

3 Sc. collecting into one. 

4 That is to say, revolved in the Cosmos Order. 

5 Of. C. H., i. 14: “So [Man]... bent his face downwards 
through the Harmony.” 


VOL. I. 28 


434 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“The man then who doth make a right use of 
memories such as these, ever being made perfect in 
perfect perfectionings, alone becometh really Perfect. 

“ But in as much as he eschews the things that men 
strive after, and is engaged in the Divine [alone], he is 
admonished by the many as though he were beside 
himself,? for they cannot perceive he is inspired by 
God.” 


PLOTINUS ON METEMPSYCHOSIS 


Let us now turn to the genuine disciples of the 
master for further light on this tenet, and first of all to 
Plotinus. 

The most sympathetic notice of this tenet in Plotinus 
is to be found in Jules Simon’s Histoire de I’ Ecole 
d’ Alexandrie (Paris, 1845), i. 588 ff, based for the most 


part on £n., I, 1.12; IT. ix. 6; IV. ii. 9; V. ii 2; and 


on Ficinus’ Commentary (p. 508 of Creuzer’s edition), 

After citing some “ironical” passages from Plotinus 
(in which the philosopher disguised the real doctrine 
which in his day still pertained to the teachings of a 
higher initiation), Jules Simon goes on to say: 

“Even though admitting that this doctrine of metem- 
psychosis is taken literally by Plotinus, we should still 
have to ask for him as for Plato,whether the human 
soul really inhabits the body of an animal, and whether 
it is not reborn only into a human body which reflects 
the nature of a certain animal by the character of its 
passions. 

“The commentators of the Alexandrian school some- 
times interpreted Plato in this sense. Thus, according 


1 All these are technical terms of the Mysteries. 

2 Of. C. H., ix. (x.) 4: “For this cause they who Gnostic are 
please not the many nor the many them. They are thought mad 
and laughed at.” 


PLATO: CONCERNING METEMPSYCHOSIS 435 


to Proclus, Plato in the Phedrus condemns the wicked 
to live as brutes and not to become them, xarievar eis 
Brov Ojperov, Kat ovK eis coma Onpecov (Proc. Comm. 
Tim., p. 329). Chalcidius gives the same interpretation, 
for he distinguishes between the doctrines of Plato and 
those of Pythagoras and Empedocles, gui non naturam 
modo feram, sed etiam formas.! Hermes (Comm. of 
Chalcidius on 7imaus; ed. Fabric., p. 350) declares in 
unmistakable terms that a human soul can never return 
to the body of an animal, and that the will of the Gods 
for ever preserves it from such disgrace.” ? 


PROCLUS ON THE DESCENT OF SOULS INTO IRRATIONAL 
NATURES 


Again, Proclus in his Commentaries on the Z%imeus, 
writes very definitely with reference to the following 
passage of Plato: 

“ And if he still in these conditions did not cease from 
vice, he would keep on changing into some brutish 
nature according as he acted in a way resembling the 
expression in genesis of such a mode of vicious living.” ® 

For he says: 

“With reference to this descent of souls into 
irrational animals, it is usual for men to enquire how 
it is meant. 

“ And some think that what are called brute-like lives 
are certain resemblances of men to brutes, for that it is 
not possible for the rational essence to become the soul 
of a brute. 

“Others allow that even this [human soul] may be 

1 Who not only made the soul go into an animal nature but 
into animal forms. 

2 The last sentence of C. H., x. (xi.) being quoted textually by 


Chalcidius. 
3 Tim., 42.0. 


436 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


immediately degraded to reason-less creatures, for that 
all souls are of one and the same species, so that they 
may become wolves and panthers and ichneumons. 

“But the true reason (Jogos) asserts that though the 
human soul may be degraded to brutes, it is [only] to 
brutes which possess the life suited to such a purpose, 
while the degraded soul is as it were vehicled on this 
[life], and bound to it sympathetically. 

“And this has been demonstrated by us at great 
length in our lectures on the Phedrus, and that this is 
the only way in which such de-gradation can take place. 
If, however, it is necessary to remind you that this 
meaning (Jogos) is that of Plato, it must be added that 
in the Republic’ he says that the soul of Thersites 
assumed an ape [/ife], but not an ape’s body, and in the 
Phedrus* that [the soul] descends into a brutish life, 
and not into a brutish body, for the mode of life goes 
with its appropriate soul. And in the passage [from 
the Zimcus] he says that it changes into a brute-like 
nature; for the brutish nature is not the body but the 
life [principle] of the brute.” ® 

1 Lib. X. 620c. 2 Phedr., 249 B. 

3 Comment. in Plat. Tim., 329D; ed. Schneider (Warsaw, 


1847), pp. 800, 801. With all of this the views of Basilides 
(Ff. F. F., 275 ff.) may be most instructively compared. 


XIV 
THE VISION OF ER 


“But to the Mindless ones, the wicked and depraved, 
the envious and covetous, and those who murder do 
and. love impiety, I am far off, yielding my place to the 
Avenging Daimon.”—C. H., i. 23. 


Er Son oF ARMENIUS 


To this Daimon it is that the “way of life” of the 
man is surrendered at death (§ 24). In this connection 
we may consider the Story or Vision of “Er Son of 
Armenius,” which Plato tells at the end of the last 
book (X.) of his Republic (6148 ff.), for the symbolism 
is very similar to that of our tractate and the subject 
is more or less the same. 

This Er is said by Clement of Alexandria to have 
been Zoroaster, “but no trace of acquaintance with 
Zoroaster is found elsewhere in Plato’s writings, and 
there is no reason for giving him the name of Er the 
Pamphylian. The philosophy of Heracleitus cannot 
be shown to be borrowed from Zoroaster, and still less 
the myths of Plato.” ! 

What the source of the story is, scholarship has 
so far been unable to discover; the vast majority of 
scholars holding it to be an invention of Plato. 

1 Jowett, Dialogues, iii. elxvi. 
437 


438 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


It is the story of a man “killed in battle,” whose 
body was brought home on the tenth day still fresh and 
showing no sign of decomposition. On the twelfth 
day, when laid on the funeral pyre, Er awakes and tells 
a strange story of his experiences in the invisible world. 

This story should be taken in close connection with 
Plutarch’s similar but fuller Vision of Arideus 
(Thespesius), upon which I have commented at length 
in my “ Notes on the Eleusinian Mysteries,” + 


FrRoM THE MYSTERIES 


I there stated that the experiences of Aridzeus were 
either a literary subterfuge for describing part of the 
instruction in certain Mysteries, or the Vision, in popular 
story form, was considered so true a description of 
what was thought to be the nature of the invisible 
world and the after-death conditions of the soul, that 
it required little alteration to make it useful for that 
purpose. ; 

I would now suggest that the Story of Er is also used 
by Plato for a somewhat similar purpose. It is further 
interesting to notice that one of the characters in the 
Vision of Er is called Ardiseus, while in Plutarch the 
main personage is called Arideus. The transposition of 
a single letter is so slight as to make the names 
practically identical, and the subject matter is so 
similar that we are inclined to think that there must 
be some connection between the Visions. Moreover, 
Arideeus is said to have been a native of Soli in Cilicia, 
just as Er is said to have been a Pamphylian; the 
tradition of such stories would thus seem to have been 
derived from Asia Minor, and the origin of them may 


1 The Theosophical Review (April, May, June, 1898), xxii. 145 ff., 
232 ff, 312 ff. 


| 


THE VISION OF ER 439 


thus be hidden in the syncretism of that land—where 
West and East were for ever meeting. It is, however, 
much safer to assume that, in the Story of Er, Plato 
is handing on the doctrines of Orphic eschatology ;* 
whether or not the story already existed in some form, 
and was worked up and elaborated by the greatest 
artist in words of all philosophers, will perhaps never 
be known. But to the story itself. 


THE CYLINDER 


614c.—Er, in a certain daimonian or psychic plane 
(ro7os Tis Satmovos), is made a spectator of a turning- 
point or change of course in the ascent and descent of 
souls. He thus seems to have been in a space or state 
midway between Tartarus and Heaven—presumably 
the invisible side of the sublunary space. 

The world-engine of Fate, or Karmic World-whorl, 
is represented by seven spheres (surrounded by an 
eighth) whose harmonious spinning is adjusted by the 
three Fates, the Daughters of Necessity. 

Jowett (loc. cit.) says that the heaven-sphere is 
represented under the symbol of a “cylinder or box.” 
Where the “ box” comes in I do not know; the term 
“cylinder” does not occur in the text, and even the 
cylinder idea is exceedingly difficult to discover in any 
precise sense. Indeed, it may be doubted whether the 
“heaven-sphere” is to be so definitely interpreted ; 
for then our discussion of the meaning of the term 
“eylinder,’ which occurs definitely in our K. KX. Frag- 
ments, would be greatly simplified. 

The matter is hard to understand, and Jowett’s 


1 And this I find to be the opinion of the last commentator on 
the subject; see Stewart (J. A.), The Myths of Plato (London, 
1905), pp. 152 ff. 


440 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


attempts at exposition are hazy and sketchy in the 
extreme. Either Plato is talking nonsense, or Jowett 
does not understand the elements of hisidea. Stewart's 
attempt, which makes use of the latest Platonic research, 
is far more successful, but he also has to abandon many 
points in despair... How difficult the solution of the 
problem is may be seen from the text, which gives the 
symbolism of the vision of the spheres somewhat as 
follows: 


THE VISION 


616 B.—“ Now when those in the meadow ” had tarried 
seven days, on the eighth they were obliged to proceed 
on their journey upwards, and, on the fourth day after,’ 
he [Er] said they came to a region where they saw light 
extended straight as a column from above through- 
out the whole extent of heaven and earth, in colour 
resembling the rainbow, only brighter and purer. 

“Another day’s journey brought them to it, and 
there they saw the extremities of the boundaries of the 
heaven extended in the midst of the light; for this 
light was the final boundary of the heaven—somewhat 
like the under-girdings of ships—and thus confined its 
whole revolution. 

“From these extremities depended the spindle of 
Necessity, by means of which all its revolutions are 
made to revolve. The spindle’s stalk‘ and its hook are 
made of adamant,> and the whorl of a mixture of 
adamant and other kinds [of elements]. 

1.So also Dreyer (J. L. E.), History of the Planetary Systems 
from Thales to Kepler (Cambridge, 1906), pp. 56 ff. 

2 The daimonian region. 

3 That is the eleventh day; Er, it will be remembered, was 
“ unconscious” for twelve days, 


4 Or shaft. 
5 That which cannot be destroyed or changed. 


THE VISION OF ER 441 


“ And the nature of the whorl is as follows. In 
shape it was like that of the one down here; but in 
itself we must understand from his description that it was 
somewhat as though in one great hollow whorl clean 
scooped out there lay another similar but smaller one 
fitted into it, as though they were jars! fitting into one 
another. And so he said there was a third and a 
fourth, and [also] four others. For in all there are 
eight whorls set in one another—looking like circles 
from above as to their rims,? [but from below] finished 
off into the continuous belly* of one whorl round the 
shaft, which is driven right through the eighth whorl. 

“The first and outermost whorl had the circle of its 
rim first in width; that of the sixth was second; that 
of the fourth, third; that of the eighth, fourth; that 
of the seventh, fifth; that of the fifth, sixth; that of 
the third, seventh ; that of the second, eighth. 

617.—* And the cirele of the largest was variegated ; 
that of the seventh brightest ; that of the eighth had 
its colour from the seventh shining on it; those of the 
second and of the fifth had [colours] somewhat like one 
another, but yellower than the preceding; the third 
had the whitest colour; the fourth was reddish; the 
sixth was second in whiteness.‘ 


1 The shape would thus approximate to an oblate spheroid. 

2 To carry out the metaphor of the jars. 3 Lit., “back.” 

4 The names of the spheres may be deduced from Tim. 38, and 
are as follows: 1. Fixed Stars (all-coloured) ; 2. Saturn (yellow) ; 
3. Jupiter (whitish) ; 4. Mars (reddish) ; 5. Mercury (yellowish) ; 
6. Venus (white); 7. Sun (light-colour); 8. Moon (light-colour 
reflected). How the above statements as to “width of rim” and 
colours are to be made to work in with the scheme of rates of 
motions and numbers given in Tim. 36, I have not as yet been 
able to discover from any commentator. And seeing that Er is 
said to have seen this mystery from a region that transcended 
even the daimonian region, it is perhaps out of place to insist on 
a purely physical interpretation of the data. 


442 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“Now the spindle as a whole circled round at the 
same rate in its revolution; and within this revolution 
as a whole the seven circles revolved slowly in a 
contrary direction to the one as a whole; of these the 
eighth went the fastest of them; the seventh, sixth, 
and fifth came second [in speed, and at the same rate] 
with one another; the fourth, in a reversed orbit, as it 
appeared to them, was third in speed ; the third was 
fourth and the second fifth. 

“The spindle revolved on the knees of Necessity ; 
and on its circles above, on each of them, was a Siren 
whom they carried round with them, singing a single 
sound or tone; and from all eight of them a single 
harmony was produced. 

“And there were three others seated at equal 
distances round about, each upon a_ throne,—the 
Daughters of Necessity, the Fates, clothed in white 
robes, with garlands on their heads, Lachesis and Clotho 
and Atropos; and they sang to the tune of the Sirens’ 
harmony,—Lachesis sang things that have been, Clotho 
things that are, and Atropos things that shall be. 

“And Clotho from time to time with her right 
hand gave an extra turn to the outer spin of the 
spindle ; Atropos, with her left, in like fashion to the 
inner ones; while Lachesis in turn touched the one 
with one hand and the other with the other. 

“Now when they [Er and the souls] arrived, they 
had to go immediately to Lachesis. Accordingly a 
prophet [a proclaimer] first of all arranged them in 
their proper order, and taking from the lap of Lachesis 
both lots! and samples of lives, he ascended a kind of 
raised place and said: 

“<The word (logos) of the Virgin Lachesis, Daughter 
of Necessity! Ye souls, ye things of a day, lo the 

1 Or number-turns, 


THE VISION OF ER 443 


beginning of another period of mortal birth that brings 
you death. It is not your daimon who will have you 
assigned to him by lot, but ye who will choose your 
daimon. He who obtains the first turn let him first 
choose a life to which he will of necessity have to 
hold. As for Virtue, Necessity has no control over 
her, but every one will possess her more or less just as 
he honours or dishonours her. The responsibility is 
the chooser’s; God is blameless.’ 

“Thus speaking he threw the lots to all of them, and 
each picked up the one that fell beside him, except Er, 
who was not permitted to do so. So every one who 
picked up a lot knew what turn he had got. 

618,.— After this he set on the ground before them 
the samples of the lives, in far greater number than 
those present. They were of every kind; not only 
lives of every kind of animal, but also lives of every 
kind of man. There were lives of autocratic power 
{lit., tyrannies} among them, some continuing to the 
end, some breaking off half-way and ending in poverty, 
exile, and beggary. There were also lives of famous 
men, some famed for their beauty of form and strength, 
and victory in the games, others for their birth and the 
virtues of their forebears; others the reverse of famous, 
and for similar reasons. So also with regard to the 
lives of women. 

“ As to the rank of the soul, it was no longer in the 
power [of the chooser], for the decree of Necessity is 
that its choosing of another life conditions its change 
of soul-rank. As for other things, riches and poverty 
were mingled with each other, and these sometimes 
with disease and sometimes with health, and sometimes 
a mean between these.” 

Thereupon Plato breaks into a noble disquisition on 
what is the best choice, and how a man should take 


444 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


with him into the world an adamantine faith in truth 
and right; and then continues: 

619 b.—* And this is precisely what the messenger 
from that invisible world reported that the prophet 
said: 

“« Even for him who comes last in turn, if he but choose 
with his mind, and live consistently, there is in store a 
life desirable and far from evil. So let neither him 
who has the best choice be careless, nor him who comes 
last despair.’ 

“And when he had thus spoken, the one who 
had the first choice, Er said, immediately went and 
chose the largest life of autocratic power, but through 
folly and greediness he did not choose with sufficient 
attention to all points, and failed to notice the fate 
wrapped up with it, of ‘dishes of his own children’! and 
other ills. But when he had examined it at leisure, he 
began to beat his breast, and bemoan his choice, not 
abiding by what the prophet had previously told him; 
for he did not lay the blame of these evils on himself, 
but on ill-luck and daimones, and everything rather 
than himself. And he was one of those who came 
from heaven, who in his former life had lived in a 
well-ordered state, and been virtuous from custom 
and not from a love of wisdom.? 

“In brief, it was by no means the minority of 
those who involved themselves in such unfortunate 
choices who came from heaven, seeing that such souls 
were unexercised in the hardships of life. Many of 
those who came from earth, as they had suffered hard- 
ships themselves, and had seen others suffering them, 
did not make their choice off-hand. 


1 A literary embellishment from the Tragic Muse of Greece, 
and the mythical recitals of Thyestian banquets. 
2 er dvev pirocoptlas. 


THE VISION OF ER . 445 


“Consequently many of the souls, independently 
of the fortune of their turn, changed good for evil, and 
evil for good. For if a man should always, whenever 
he comes into life on earth, live a sound philosophic 
life, and the lot of his choice should not fall out to him 
among the last, the chances are, according to this news 
from the other world, that he will not only spend his 
life happily here, but also that the path which he will 
tread from here to there, and thence back again, will 
not be below the earth? and difficult, but easy and of a 
celestial nature. 

620.—* Yes, the vision he had, Er said, was well 
worth the seeing, showing how each class of souls chose 
their lives.2 The vision was both a pitiful and laughable 
as well as a wonderful thing to see. For the most part 
they chose according to the experience of their former life. 
For Er said that he saw the soul that had once been 
that of Orpheus becoming the life of a swan for choice? 
through its hatred of womankind, because owing to the 
death of Orpheus at the hands of women, it did not 
wish to come into existence by conception in a woman. 
He further saw the soul of Thamyras* choose the life of 
a nightingale. On the contrary, he saw also a swan 
change to the choice of a human life, and other musical 
animals in like fashion, 

“The soul that obtained the twentieth lot chose 


1 The Tartarean spheres of the invisible world, popularly 
believed to be below the earth ; that is, philosophically, more 
material than earth-life. 

2 The vision (6éa) was therefore typical. 

3 'The birds are typical of souls living in the air—that is, in 
aery bodies and not in physical ones ; or types of intelligence. 

4 Or Thamyris, an ancient Thracian bard ; it is said that in his 
conceit he imagined he could surpass the Muses in song, in con- 
sequence of which he was deprived of his sight and the power of 
singing. 


446 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


the life of a lion; it was the soul of Ajax, son 
of Telamon, to avoid being a man, because it still re- 
membered the [unjust] decision about the arms. The 
next soul was Agamemnon’s; and it too, out of hatred to 
the human race on account of its sufferings, changed 
into the life of an eagle The soul of Atalanta 
obtained its lot in the middle, and letting her eye fall 
on the great honours paid an ‘athlete, was unable to 
pass it by, and took it. The soul of Epeius,? son of 
Panopeus, he saw pass into the nature of a woman 
skilful in the arts. And far away among the last he 
saw the soul of the buffoon Thersites putting on an ‘ ape.’ 

“By a stroke of luck also he saw the soul of 
Odysseus, which had obtained the last lot of all, come 
to make its choice. From memory of its former labours 
it had given itself a rest from love of renown, and for 
a long time went about to find the life of a man in 
private life with nothing to do with public affairs, and 
with great difficulty found one lying in a corner and 
thus passed over by all the rest; on seeing it, it de- 
clared that it would have done the same even if it had 
had first turn, and been glad to do it. | 

“And Er said that of the rest of the brutes also in 
like fashion some of them passed into men, and some 
into one another, the unrighteous ones changing into 
wild ones, and the righteous into tame; in fact, there 
were intermixings of every kind. 

“When, then, all the souls had chosen their lives 
according to the number of their turn, they went in 
order to Lachesis; and she sent along with them the 
daimon each had chosen, as watcher over his life and 
bringer to pass of the things he had chosen. And 


1 Notice the “lion” and “eagle” are selected as types—they 
being typical sun-animals, as we have already seen. 
* The fabled engineer of the Trojan Horse. 


THE VISION OF ER 447 


the daimon first of all brought the soul to Clotho, set it 
beneath her hand and the whirling of the spindle, thus 
ratifying the fate each soul had chosen in its turn. 
And after he had attached it to her, he brought it to 
the spinning of Atropos, thus making its destinies? 
irreversible. 

621.—“Thence [Er] went, without turning, [down] 
beneath the Throne? of Necessity, and when he had 
passed down through it, and the others had also done so, 
they all passed on to the Plain of Forgetfulness (Lethé) 
in a frightful and stifling heat ; for it was bare of trees 
and vegetation of every kind. 

“ As it was now evening they camped by the River 
Heedlessness whose water no vessel can hold.* They 
were all, however, compelled to drink a certain quantity 
of its water ; those who are not safeguarded by prudence 
drink more than their quantity, while he who keeps on 
drinking it forgets everything. 

“When they had fallen asleep and midnight had 
come, there was thunder and earthquake, and thence 
suddenly they were carried up into birth [genesis] some 
one way some another, like shooting stars, 

“ Er, however, was prevented from drinking the water ; 
but in what manner and by what means he got back 
to his body he could not say, only, suddenly waking in 
the morning, he found himself lying on the pyre.” 


1 7d émixrAwobévra—a play on KAw6d, 

2 This is probably a symbol of the heaven-plane. 

3 ob 7d dup ayyelov od8ty oréyew. So this is usually translated ; 
but as the souls drink of it, the appropriateness of the rendering 
is not very apparent. On the other hand, oréyew is used of 
things that are water-tight—e.g. houses and ships ; hence “ whose 
water no vessel can keep out.” The “vessel” might thus stand 
for the ship of the soul ; and if so, we are in contact with an 
Egyptian idea. The River is in the Desert—the reverse of the 
Nile and Egypt, of Osiris and Isis, their Typhonean counterparts. 


448 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


COMMENTARY 


The question that one naturally asks oneself is: 
Did Plato conclude his great treatise on the Ideal State 
with a popular legend in jest, or had he some deeper 
purpose? I cannot but think that he was jesting 
seriously. Is it too wild a supposition that he is 
hinting at things which he could not disclose because of 
his oath? Those who knew would understand ; those 
who did not would think he was jesting simply, and so 
the mysteries would not be disclosed. 

In any case we have, I think, got a hint of the part 
played by the Daimon in our treatise. Whether or not 
Hermes “ copied” the idea from Plato, or both derived 
it from the same tradition, must be left to the fancy 
and taste of individual scholars. The Daimon is the 
watcher over the “way of life” (700°); he is not 
necessarily a Kakodaimon, but so to speak the Karmic 
Agent of the soul, appointed to carry out the “choice ” 
of that soul, both good and ill, according to the Law of 
Necessity.1 The choice is man’s; Nature adjusts the 
balance. 

The Vision is of a typical nature, and the types are 
mythologized in the persons of well-known characters 
in Grecian story. The “way of life” the souls choose 
becomes the garment of “ habit” they are to wear, their 
form of personality, or karmic limitation. Apparently 
some souls, instead of choosing a reincarnation in a 
human body, prefer to live the “lives” of certain animal 
natures. Are we then to believe that Plato seriously 
endorsed the popular ideas of metempsychosis? Or is 
it possible that he is referring to some state of existence 
of souls, which was symbolized by certain animal types 


1 For the more intimate teaching on this point, see C. H., 
x. (xi.) 16 ff. 


THE VISION OF ER 449 


in the Mysteries; as was certainly the case with the 
“lion” and “eagle,” though the “swan” and “nightin- 
gale” and “ape” are, as far as I am aware, never 
mentioned in this connection? Can it be that Plato 
here gives play to hisimagination, basing his speculations 
on some general idea he may have learned in Egypt ? 

We know from the so-called “ Diagram of the Ophites,” 
which is still traceable in a fragmentary form in the 
polemic of Origen against Celsus, that the “seven 
spheres” of the lower psychic nature were characterised 
by the names of animals: lion, bull, serpent, eagle, bear, 
dog, ass. We also know how the whole subject of 
animal correspondences preoccupied the attention of 
the Egyptian priesthood. But not only can we now 
make no reasonable scheme out of the fragmentary 
indications that have come down to us, but we also 
feel pretty well certain that if Plutarch’s account of 
the beliefs of the later Egyptians on the subject is 
approximately reliable, the priests themselves of those 
days had no longer any consistent scheme. 

We may, therefore, conclude either that the whole 
matter was a vain superstition entirely devoid of any 
basis in reality ; or that there was a psychic science of 
animal natures and their relationship to man which 
was once the possession of the priesthood of the ancient 
civilisation of Egypt, but that it was lost, owing to the 
departure from amongst men of those who had the power 
to understand it, and subsequently only fragments of 
misunderstood tradition remained among the lesser folk 
on earth. This at anyrate is the theory of our Tris- 
megistic treatises. 


VOL. I. 29 


XV 
CONCERNING THE CRATER OR CUP 


“He filled a mighty Cup with it [Mind], and sent it 
down, joining a Herald [to it], to whom He gave 
command to make this proclamation to the hearts of 
men: Baptize thyself with this Cup’s baptism,” etc.— 
C. #., iv. (v.) 4. 


THE CRATER IN PLATO 


Whence came this idea of a Crater or Cup into our 
Trismegistic literature? Most scholars will answer 
unhesitatingly: From Plato. The Crater was the Cup 
in which the Creator mixed the Elements of the World- 
Soul; for we read in Zimeus (41D), where Plato is 
treating of the formation of human souls: 

“Thus spake He, and once again into the Cup which 
He had used in blending and mingling the Soul of the 
Universe, He poured the remains of the Elements He 
had employed, and mingled them in much the same 
manner; they were not, however, pure as before, but 
in the second and third degree.” 

I am, however, not inclined to attribute the origin 
of this symbolic expression simply to the imagery of 
Plato’s poetic mind, but am far more inclined to be- 
lieve that Plato was using a familiar figure of “ Orphic” 


symbolism. The idea of not only an Ultimate Crater, 
450 


CONCERNING THE CRATER OR CUP 451 


but of many subsidiary ones in the celestial and invisible 
realms, is closely connected with the “ Orphic” idea of 
a Vortex. 


In “ORPHEUS,” MACROBIUS, AND PROCLUS 


Orpheus is said to have called the Ather the Mighty 
Whirlpool. This forms the Egg or Womb of Cosmos; 
it is a modification of Chaos or Rhea, the Eternally- 
flowing, the Mother of the Gods, the Great Container. 
Thus Proclus, in speaking of Chaos, says: 

“The last Infinity, by which also Matter (iXy) is 
circumscribed, is the Container, the field and plane of 
ideas. About her is ‘neither limit, nor foundation, nor 
seat, but excessive Darkness.’” 2 

Plato, as we have seen, in his psychogony, speaks 
openly of this Cup or Crater (Mixing Space, or Vortex) 
in two aspects ; in it the Deity mixes the All-Soul of 
universal nature from the purest Cosmic Elements, and 
from it He also “ladles out” the souls of men, composed 
of a less pure mixture of these Elements. 

Further, Macrobius tells us that Plato elsewhere 
indirectly refers to another aspect of this Cup. 

“Plato speaks of this in the Phedo, and says that 
the soul is dragged back into body, hurried on by new 
intoxication, desiring to taste a fresh draught of the 
overflow of matter,’ whereby it is weighed down and 
brought back [to earth]. The sidereal [astral] Crater of 
Father Liber [Dionysus, Bacchus] is a symbol of this 
mystery; and this is what the Ancients called the 


1 weadpiov xdoua (Simplicius, Ause., iv, 123); magna vorago 
(Syrianus, Metaph., ii. 33a). Cf. Prolegg. ch. xi., “The Orphic 
Tradition of the Genesis of the World-Egg.” 

2 Comment. in Tim., ii. 117. See my Orpheus, p. 154. 

3 Gnosticd, “the superfluity of naughtiness,’ 


452 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


River of Lethe, the Orphics saying that Father Liber 
was Hylic Mind.”! 

We have here, therefore, a higher and lower Cup. 
Proclus, moreover, speaks of several of such Craters, 
when he writes: 

“Plato in the Philebus hands on the tradition of the 
Vulcanic Crater. ..and Orpheus is acquainted with 
the Cup of Dionysus, and ranges many such Cups round 
the Solar Table.” ? 

Elsewhere, again, Proclus tells us that the Demiurge 
is said “to constitute the psychical essences in con- 
junction with the Crater”; this “Crater is the peculiar 
cause of souls, and is co-arranged with the Demiurgus 
and filled from Him, but fills souls”; thus it is called 
the Fountain of Souls.’ 

If with these indications before us we might venture 
to generalize, we might say that, according to Orpheo- 
Pythagorean, Platonic, and Hermetic ideas, the “ matter ” 
of every “plane” was thought of as proceeding from 
such a Crater or Cup, from within without, and the 
elements thereof as being refunded into such a Cup or 
Centre or Receptacle—that is, from a more subtle, 
simpler, and inner phase to a more gross, complex, and 
outer phase, and vice versd. In other words, the Crater 
is the ‘‘monadic” or “atomic” state of the matter of 
any given phase or state of existence. 


THE VISION OF ARIDAUS 


With the above data before us, it will also be in- 
structive to turn to the Vision of Arideus (Thespesius) 


1 Comment. in Som. Scip., XI. ii. 66. 
2 Comment. in Tim., v. 316 (Taylor's trans.). 
3 Taylor (T.), Theology of Plato, V. xxxi. 


CONCERNING THE CRATER OR CUP 453 


as related by Plutarch, a vision that may be com- 
pared with profit with the Vision of Er as told 
by Plato. Thespesius is being conducted through 
Hades, or the Invisible World in contact with 
earth-life, by a kinsman who has “passed over,” as 
Spiritists would say, and curiously enough he there 
comes across a Chasm and a Crater—for part of the 
story runs: 

“After these explanations he was conducted by 
his kinsman at great speed across an immense space, 
as it seemed, nevertheless easily and directly as 
though supported by wings of light-rays; until having 
arrived at a Vast Vortex (xyaoua) extending down- 
wards, he was abandoned by the power that sup- 
ported him. ' 

“He observed also that the same thing happened 
to the rest of the souls there, for checking their 
flight, like birds, and sinking down, they fluttered 
round the Vortex in a circle, not daring to go straight 
through it. 

“Inside it seemed to be decked like Bacchic caves? 
with trees and verdure and every kind of foliage, while 
out of it came a soft and gentle air, laden with 
marvellous sweet scents, making a blend like wine for 
topers, so that the souls feasting on the fragrance were 
melted with delight in mutual embraces, while the 
whole place was wrapt in revelry and laughter and the 
spirit of sport and pleasure.® 

“Thespesius’ kinsman told him that this was the 
Way by which Dionysus ascended to the Gods and 


1 De Sera Numinis Vindicta, xxii. (ed. Bernardakis, iii, 454— 
466). 

2 Were the Bacchic Mysteries then celebrated in caves ? 

3 This is clearly in correspondence with the “ Astral Crater of 
Father Liber” of Macrobius. 


454 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


afterwards took up Semele ;! it was called the Place of 
Léthé (Oblivion).? 

“Wherefore he would not suffer Thespesius to stay 
there, though he wished to do so, but forcibly dragged 
him away, explaining how that the rational part of 
the soul was melted and moistened ® by pleasure, while 
the irrational part, and that which is of a corporeal 
nature, being then moistened and made fleshly, awakens 
the memory of the body, and from this memory come 
a yearning and a desire which drag down the soul into 


1 His “mother,” from the under-world; referring to the 
mysteries of generation and the indestructibility of life. Semele 
in giving birth to Dionysus the Son of Zeus (the Creative Power), 
is said to have been killed by the Power of her Lord, but she was 
subsequently restored to life among the Gods by the Power of her 
Son, In reincarnating, it is said that part of the soul in giving 
birth to itself in this state “dies.” The “child” then born may, 
in his turn, in the case of one perfect, become the saviour of his 
“mother,” now become his spouse, and raise her, who is also 
himself, to a higher state. 

2 Compare Pistis Sophia (336, 337), which tells us how certain 
karmic agencies “ give unto the old soul [prior to reincarnation] 
a Draught of Oblivion composed of the Seed of Iniquity, filled 
with all manner of desire and all forgetfulness. And the moment 
that that soul drinketh of that Draught, it forgetteth all the 
spaces [or regions] through which it hath travelled, and all the 
chastisements through which it hath passed; and that deadly 
Draught of Oblivion becometh a body external to the soul, like 
unto the soul in every way, and its perfect resemblance, and 
hence they call it the ‘counterfeit spirit.’” 

But in the case of the purified soul it is different ; for a higher 
power “bringeth a Cup full of intuition and wisdom, and also 
prudence, and giveth it to the soul, and casteth the soul intoa 
body which will not be able to fall asleep or forget, because of 
the Cup of Prudence which hath been given unto it, but will be 
ever pure in heart and seeking after the Mysteries of Light, until 
it hath found them, by order of the Virgin of Light, in order 
that [that soul] may inherit the Light for ever.” (Ibid., 392, 
“ Books of the Saviour.”) 

3 Compare the “ Moist Essence” of C. H., i. 4, and iii. (iv.) 1. 


CONCERNING THE CRATER OR CUP 455 


generation . , . the soul being weighed down with 
moisture. 

“Next Thespesius, after travelling another great 
distance, seemed to be looking at a huge Cup, with 
streams flowing into it; one whiter than the foam of 
the sea or snow, another like the purple which the 


rainbow sends forth, while from a distance the 


others were tinged with other colours, each having 
its own shade. 

“But when he came closer, the Cup itself (into which 
they flowed)—the surroundings disappearing, and the 
colours growing fainter—lost its varied colouring and 
only retained a white brilliance.” 


Compare also the Hellenist writer in the Naassene 
Document (§ 17 S.): “The Greek theologi generally 
call Him [the Logos] the “Heavenly Horn of Mén,” 
because he has mixed and mingled all things with all.” 

On this the Jewish Gnostic writer comments: “This 
is the Drinking Vessel,—the Cup in which ‘the King 
drinketh and divineth.’” 

It is, says the Hellenist commentator again, “the 
Cup (of Anacreon) speaking forth speechlessly the 
Ineffable Mystery.” 

The Jewish commentator was a contemporary of 
Philo’s, and the Hellenist was prior to him; thus we 
see that the Cup symbol was used in precisely the 
same significance as in our text in at least the first 
century B.c., and that the idea was referred to the 
Greek theologers—in other words, the Orphics—and 
not to Plato. 


1 «parhp—bowl or basin. 


456 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


THE ORIGIN OF THE SYMBOL TO BE SOUGHT 
IN ORPHIC TRADITION 


With the above data before us, I think we may be 
persuaded without difficulty that the idea of the Cup, 
or Mixing-Bowl, did not owe its origin to any invention 
of Plato’s, but that the greatest of philosophers, when 
he makes use of the symbol, does but employ a familiar 
image well known to his audience—as, indeed, is very 
apparent in the summary fashion in which he intro- 
duces the figure. In other words, the symbol or 
image was a commonplace of the Orphic tradition, and 
doubtless, therefore, familiar to every Pythagorean. 

Now, in our treatise it is noticeable that this Cup- 
symbol is equated with the Monad? or Oneness—a 
technical Pythagorean term. 

1 It is of interest to notice that one of the apocryphal Books of 
Moses was called The Monad, and another The Key; this argues 


an early date and wide renown for our two treatises so entitled. 
See R. 182, n. 3. 


XVI 


THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST 
HERMES 


PrauH, SEKHET AND I-EM-HETEP (ASCLEPIUS) 


BunbGE, in his Gods of the Egyptians (vol. i. ch. xvi.), 
tells us that the Great Triad of Memphis consisted of 
Ptah, Sekhet, and I-em-hetep. 

Ptah, as we have seen, was the “Sculptor or 
Engraver,” the Demiurge par excellence. He is called 
the “Very Great God who came into being in the 
earliest time”; “Father of fathers, Power of powers” ; 
“Father of beginnings and Creator of the Egg[s] of the 
Sun and Moon”; “Lord of Maat [Truth], King of the 
Two Lands, the God of the Beautiful Face . . . who 
created His own Image, who fashioned His own Body, 
who hath established Maat throughout the Two Lands”; 
“ Ptah the Disk of Heaven, Illuminer of the Two Lands 
with the Fire of His Two Eyes.” The “ Workshop of 
Ptah” was the World Invisible. 

It was Ptah who carried out the commands concern- 
ing the creation of the universe issued by Thoth. 

The Syzygy or.female counterpart of Ptah was 
Sekhet, “who was at once his sister and wife, and the 
mother of his son Nefer-Tem, and a sister-form of the 
Goddess Bast” (op. cit, i, 514). She is called: 
“Greatly Beloved One of Ptah, Lady of Heaven, 
Mistress of the Two Lands”; and one of her commonest 


names is “ Nesert,” that is “ Flame.” 
457 


458 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


It was Thoth (Tekh) who, with his Seven Wise Ones, 
planned the world (20, 516). But if Ptah is the 
executive power of Thoth and his Seven Wise Ones, so 
is Thoth the personification of the Intelligence of Ptah. 
It is in this way that Sekhet becomes identified with 
Maat, the inseparable spouse of Thoth. 


NEFER-TEM 


The third member of the Memphite Triad is Nefer- 
Tem, or the “Young Tem.” In the Ritual (Ch. Ixxxi., 
version B) we read the “apology”: “Hail, thou Lotus, 
thou type of the God Nefer-Tem! I am he who 
knoweth you, and I know your name among the Gods, 
the Lords of the Underworld, and I am one of you.” 
Again, in Ch. clxxiv. 19, Nefer-Tem is compared with 
“the Lotus at the nostrils of Ri”; also, in Ch. elxxviii. 
36, Nefer-Tem has the same title. 

In the later texts Nefer-Tem is identified with 
many Gods, all of them forms of Horus or Thoth 
(tb., 522). 

Here we are in contact with the Ptah-tradition of 
Memphis which, we have seen, played an important 
part in the heredity of the cosmogenesis of our 
“Poemandres” tractate. In it the simultaneous identi- 
fication and distinction of Thoth and Ptah and of Maat 
and Sekhet are naturally explained, and the Son of 
these Powers is the Young Tem, identified with the 
Young Horus or Young Thoth who is to succeed his 
Father. Are we here on the track of the ancestry of 
our Tat ? 

At Heliopolis (Annu) the Ancient God Tem was 
equated with Ra. Tem was the Father-God, Lord of 
Heaven, and Begetter of the Gods (op. cit.,i. 92, 93). 
Usertsen I. rebuilt the sanctuary of Heliopolis about 


THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 459 


2433 B.c., and dedicated it to Ra in the two forms of 
Horus and Temu (1., 330). 

“Tem was the first living Man-God known to the 
Egyptians, just as Osiris was the first dead Man-God, 
and as such was always represented in human form 
and with a human head... . 

“Tem was, in fact, to the Egyptians a manifestation 
of God in human form. ... It is useless to attempt 
to assign a date to the period when the Egyptians 
began to worship God in human form, for we have no 
material for so doing; the worship of Tem must, 
however, be of very great antiquity, and the fact that 
the priests of Ra in the Fifth and Sixth Dynasties united 
him to their God under the name of Ra-Tem, proves 
that his worship was wide-spread, and that the God 
was thought to possess attributes similar to those of 
Ra” (ib., 349, 350). 

In the Trismegistic tradition in which Thoth holds 
the chief place, the Young Tem would thus represent 
the Young Thoth who succeeded to his Father when 
that Father ascended to the Gods. 


ImHotep-I[MUTH-ASCLEPIUS 


Moreover the Egyptian texts prove that besides 
Nefer-Tem still another Son of Ptah was regarded as 
the third member of the Memphitic Triad. This Son 
was called I-em-hetep (or Imhotep), whom the Greeks 
called Imouthés or Imuth, and equated him with their 
Asclepius. 

The name I-em-hetep means “He who cometh in 
Peace,” and is very appropriate to the God who brought 
the knowledge of Healing to mankind ; but I-em-hetep, 
though specially the God of medicine, was also the God 
of study and learning in general. 


460 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“As a God of learning he partook of some of the 
attributes of Thoth, and he was supposed to take the 
place of this God in the performance of funeral cere- 
monies, and in superintending the embalming of the 
dead ; in later times he absorbed the duties of Thoth as 
‘Scribe of the Gods, and the authorship of the words 
of power which protected the dead from enemies of 
every kind in the Underworld was ascribed to him” 
(1b., 522, 523). 

In the “ Ritual of Embalmment”! it is said to the 
Deceased: “Thy soul uniteth itself to I-em-hetep 
whilst thou art in the funeral valley.” 

The oldest shrine of the God was situated close to 
Memphis, and was called the “Temple of I-em-hetep, 
the Son of Ptah,’ which the Greeks called the 
Asclépieion. 

Under Ptolemy IV., Philopator (222-205 B.c.), a 
temple was built to I-em-hetep on the Island of Phile, 
and from the hieroglyphic inscriptions we learn that 
the God was called: “Great One, Son of Ptah, the 
Creative God, made by Thenen, begotten by him and 
beloved by him, the God of divine forms in the temples, 
who giveth life to all men, the Mighty One of wonders, 
the Maker of times [?], who cometh unto him that 
calleth upon him wheresoever he may be, who giveth 
sons to the childless, the wisest and most learned one, 
the image and likeness of Thoth the Wise.” ” 

Imhotep-Asclepius was thus the “image and 
likeness of Thoth the Wise,” even as Nefer-Tem was 


1 See Maspero, op. cit., p.80. Which of the numerous opp. citt. 
of Maspero’s this may be is not clear from Budge’s reference. 

2 Of. Brugsch, Thesaurus, p. 783; Religion, p. 527. Sethe, 
Imhotep, 1903—so Budge; but, more accurately, Sethe (K. ) 
Untersuchungen zur Geschichte ond Altertwmskunde Agyptens, ii, 4 
(“Imhotep, der Asklepios der Agypter”). 


THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 461 


Young Thoth. Here we have precisely the distinction 
drawn between Asclepius and Tat in our Trismegistic 
literature; Asclepius was trained in all philosophy, Tat 
was young and as yet untrained. 

“T-em-hetep,” concludes Budge, “ was the God who 
sent sleep to those who were suffering and in pain, and 
those who were afflicted with any kind of disease 
formed his special charge; he was the Good Physician 
both of Gods and men, and he healed the bodies of 
mortals during life, and superintended the arrangements 
for the preservation of the same after death. . . . He was 
certainly the God of physicians and of all those who 
were occupied with the mingled science of medicine 
and magic; and when we remember that several of the 
first Kings of the Early Empire are declared by 
Manetho, whose statements have been supported by 
the evidence of the papyri, to have written, 7c. caused 
to be edited, works on medicine, it is clear that the 
God of medicine was in Memphis as old as the archaic 
period” (70., 524). 

So much for the more important information that 
Budge has to offer us on the subject of Asclepius-Imuth 
from the side of pure Egyptian tradition—if we can 
use such a phrase of that tradition as strained through 
the sieve of almost purely physical interpretation.? 


THATH-TAT 


And now let us turn to Reitzenstein and his instruc- 
tive Dissertation, “ Hermes u. Schiiler” (pp. 117 ff.). 


1 For Asclepius among the Greeks, see Thraemer’s article 
“ Asklepios” in Roscher’s Lex. d. . . . Mythologie (Leipzig, 1884- 
1900), i. 615-641 ; also the “Cornell Studies in Classical Philo- 
sophy,” No. III., The Cult of Asklepios, by Alice Walton, Ph.D, 
(Ithaca, N.Y., U.S.A., 1894). 


462 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Unquestionably the most general form of sermon 
found in the remains of our Trismegistic literature is 
that of instruction to Tat the “Son” of Hermes, who is 
“Father” and Initiator. Of these instructions two 
Corpora existed, namely, “The General Sermons” and 
“The Expository Sermons.” 

The name Tat is, of course, a variant of Thoth (Tehut) ; 
but whereas Hermes himself is always in such sermons 
characterised as Thrice- greatest, Tat has not yet 
reached to this grade of mastership ; he is still “ Young.” 

The name “Tat” occurs in one of the prayers in the 
Magic Papyri, part of which is undecipherable, and 
can only be translated by following the conjecture of 
Reitzenstein (p. 117, n. 6). 

“ Show thyself unto me in thy prophetic power O God 
of mighty mind, Thrice-great Hermes! Let him who 
rules the four regions of the Heavens and the four 
foundations of the Earth appear. Be present unto me 
O thou in Heaven, be present unto me thou from the 
Egg. . . . Speak, the Two Gods also are round thee,— 
the one God is called Thath and the other Haf.”?! 

Spiegelberg equates Haf with Hpj, the “Genius of 
the Dead” who appears coupled with Thoth in a Coptic 
Magic Papyrus of the second century A.D.,2 where Isis 
speaks of “my father Ape-Thoth.” This thus seems to 
identify Haf with Anubis—that is, Harmanup or Horus 
as Anubis. And Anubis, as Hermes-Tat, was considered 
in Egyptian tradition to be a composer of sacred 
scripture.® 

1 Wessely, Denkschr. d. K. K. Akad, (1893), p. 38, ll. 550 ff. ; 
Kenyon, Cat. of Gk. Pap., p. 102. 

2 Griffith, in Zeitschr. f. dig. Sprache (1900), p. 90. 

3 According to Manetho; see Miiller, Manetho Fragm., 4. 


THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 463 


THE INCARNATIONS OF THOTH 


The prayer just cited appears to put us into contact 
with the atmosphere of some inner mysteries of 
spiritual instruction. The God or Spiritual Master 
contains in himself his disciple, or a duad or triad 
of disciples; the relationship of Master and disciple 
is of the most intimate nature; not only is it of that 
of father to son, but of mother to child—for the 
disciple is born in the womb of the Master Presence. 
The disciple is as it were his ka. 

Thus for the Egyptians, as Sethe and others have 
pointed out, the wise priest, that is a priest truly 
initiated into the Wisdom, was regarded as an incarna- 
tion of Thoth, and such an one after the death of his 
body was worshipped as Thoth, 

And so we find at Medinet Habu the remains of a 
shrine, erected in the time of Ptolemy IX. (Euergetes 
II.)\—146-117 Bc.—to a certain High Priest of 
Memphis, Teos, who is called “ Teos the Ibis,”? that is 
Thoth, and so identified with Thoth himself. 

What we learn from the general tradition of this 
belief in the “incarnation ” of Thoth into the perfected 
disciple of Wisdom, and the ascription of sacred 
literature to similar though not identical God-names to 
that of Thoth himself, is that there was on the one 


1 Teephibis. Of. Catal. Cod. Astrol. Grec., i. 167: “ Hermes 
Phibi the Thrice-greatest.” Sethe (op. sup. cit.) would equate this 
Teephibis with Hermes of Thebes, in connection with the state- 
ment of Clement of Alexandria (Strom., I. xxi. 1384): “Of those, 
too, who once lived as men among the Egyptians, but who have 
been made Gods by human opinion, are Hermes of Thebes and 
Asclepius of Memphis.” If this is correct, we have our Tris- 
megistus flourishing as Teephibis at the end of the second 
century B.C. But there seems to my mind to be nothing definite 
in Sethe’s contention. 


464 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


hand a firm belief in the unity of the Thoth-tradition, 
and on the other a necessary division of the sacred 
literature into older and later periods. The Thoth of the 
older period was regarded as a God, the Thoth of more 
recent times as a God-man.! And so we find Plato 
in the famous passage of the Philebus, 18 B, uncertain 
whether to speak of Thoth as God or man. 


THE DIScIPLES OF LORD HERMES IN PETOSIRIS AND 
NECHEPSO 


In the known oldest references to the Thoth-Hermes 
literature, there has so far not been discovered any- 
thing that suggests the existence of a distinction 
between Hermes [Thoth] and Tat [Thoth]; but the 
absence of references proves little. Already, however, 
Nechepso and Petosiris, in the second century B.C., 
make Hermes the teacher of the younger God-disciples 
Anubis and Asclepius; in which connection it is of 
interest to note the following passage from a horoscope 
for the first year of the Emperor Antoninus Pius,’ set up 
by the priests of Hermes at Thebes—the Greek of which 
is very faulty and evidently written by “ Barbari”: 

“ After enquiry based on many books, handed down 
to us by the wise Ancients, the Chaldzans,—both 
Petosiris,and especially King Necheus [s7c; z.e. Nechepso], 
in as much as they also took counsel of our Lord 
Hermes and of Asclepius, that is of Imouthés, son of 
Hephéstus... .”% ; 

1 There is also an older and younger Isis in the K. K. extracts, 
and also in both these and in P. S.A. an older and younger 
Asclepius. 

2 R. (p. 119) has “des Kaisers Antonius” ; but I know of no 
Emperor so called. The first years of Antoninus Pius would be 


138-139 A.D. 
3 Pap. du Louvre, 19 bis, Notices et Extratts, xviii. 2, 136. 


THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 465 


From this we learn that in the second century A.D. 
the writings of Petosiris and Nechepso, together with 
the “Chaldean Books,” still formed part of the Temple 
Library at Thebes; moreover, that Petosiris and 
Nechepso, in the second century B.c., based themselves 
on these Books as well as on Books ascribed to both 
Hermes and Asclepius: Moreover, from the Fragments 
of Nechepso! we learn that he had before him a 
sermon of Asclepius called Moirogenesis, concerning the 
Genesis of Fate, and also Dialogues in which Hermes 
instructs Asclepius and Anubis concerning the mysteries 
of astrology. These Trismegistic works must thus be 
dated prior to the beginning of the second century B.c. 

Sethe, in his essay on Asclepius - Imhotep, has en- 
deavoured to show that this Imuth was originally a 
man, and that divine honours were first paid to him in 
the reign of Amasis (Amésis—Aah-mes), about 1'700 B.c. 


TOSOTHRUS-ASCLEPIUS 


Manetho, however, tells us another story, when he 
writes of a certain king of the Third Dynasty (3.0, 
3700): “Toso[r]thrus reigned twenty-nine years, He 
is called Asclepius by the Egyptians, for his medical 
knowledge. He built a house of hewn stones, and 
greatly patronised literature.” 2 

Tosothrus is Tcheser or Tcheser-sa (Doser), the 
second king of the Third Dynasty from Memphis. 
The “house of hewn stones” which he built, received 
remarkable confirmation from the excavations which 
were carried out by the Prussian General Minutoli 
in 1819 in the Step-Pyramid of Sakkara, This temple, 

1 Riess, Fr, 25, 

2 Cory, An. Frags, p. 100. Budge, A History of Egypt 
(London, 1902), i. 218, 

3 Reise zum Tempel des Jupiter Ammon, pp. 296 ff. 

VOL. I. 30 


466 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


says Budge (op. cit., i. 219) “is certainly the oldest of all 
the large buildings which have successfully resisted the 
action of wind and weather, and destruction by the 
hand of man.” 

In the Inscription of the Seven Famine Years, 
moreover, belonging in its present form to the later 
Ptolemaic period, but a copy of a far more ancient 
record, we read, in Sethe’s restored Greek text: 

“Tosothrus, in whose days (lived) Imouthés. He 
was considered by the Egyptians to be Asclepius 
because of his knowledge of the healing art; he dis- 
covered the art of building with hewn stones, and, 
moreover, occupied himself with literature,” 

We thus learn that long before Manetho’s time there 
was an Asclepian literature, and not only did this deal 
with medicine but also with scripture in general and 
with “ masonry.” 


IMUTH-ASCLEPIUS THE MASTER MASON AND PORT 


That Asclepius was specially occupied with the 
sacred building-art, may be seen from Sethe’s study, 
whose industry has discovered a book on Temple-build- 
ing ascribed to Imuth, a “ Book that came from Heaven 
northwards from Memphis.” It was according to this 
Book that Ptolemy X. (Soter II.) and Ptolemy XI. 
(Alexander I.) enlarged the building of their ancestors 
at Edfu, “in agreement with the writing concerning 
the plans of the Temple of Horus, which the chief 
prelector of the priests, Imhotp, the son of Ptah, had 
written.” 

There were also certain very ancient Sermons (or 
Songs) of Imhotp, and a saying from one of these 


1 A rock inscription found on the cataract island Sehél. R., 
p. 129. 


THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 467 


Sermons, the “Song from the House of King Intf,” is 
given by Sethe as follows: 

“T have heard the words of Imhotp and Hardadaf ; 
they are still much spoken of, but where are their 
abodes ?” FA 

Perhaps this explains the statement in S. H. I. (Stob., 
Ec., i. 49; W. p. 467, 4) that Asclepius-Imuth was the 
inventor of poetry. Imuth was to the Egyptians what 
Orpheus, Linus or Muszeus was to the Greeks. 

And so Reitzenstein (p. 121) concludes that the 
tradition of the old Egyptian and Hellenistic literature 
is unbroken. In Hellenistic times this view of the 
Divine Son of Ptah of Memphis and of his chief Shrine 
at Memphis spread widely, and his cult was extended 
to Thebes and even to Phile. At Thebes he appears 
united with the Theban Thoth and his younger likeness 
or image Amenhotep—the twin-brother of Imhotep 
(Asclepius)—Son of Hapu, who is said to have lived 
as a man under King Amenophis III. (Amen-hetep), 
1450 B.c., and who tells us himself how he became 
acquainted with the “ Book of God” and saw in vision 
the “ Pre-eminence of Thoth.” } 

The chief Temple of Asclepius at Memphis was still 
honoured in later times, and even in the days of Jerome 
its priesthood was renowned for its occult wisdom.” 


AESCULAPIUS THE HEALER 


Of the Cult of Aésculapius in Greece and of the wide- 
spread influence of this ideal there is little need to remind 
the student of the comparative history of religions; we 
cannot, however, refrain from appending a paragraph 

1R., p. 124. Cf. Sethe, Agyptiaca, Festschrift fiir G. Ebers, 


pp. 106 ff. 
2 Ammian. Marc., xxii. 14,7; Vit, Hil., 21. 


468 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


from a remarkable address recently delivered by the 
Rev. J. Estlin Carpenter to the students of Manchester 
College, Oxford, in which he says: 

“Pass beyond the limits of Israel and its hopes, and 
you enter a world of religious phenomena, so varied as 
to be practically inexhaustible, and all the patient 
labour of the last thirty years has only begun to exhibit 
to us its contents. At every turn you are confronted 
with beliefs resembling those which pervade our New 
Testament, so that Prof. Cheyne has recently attempted 
in a very remarkable little volume, Bible Problems, to 
trace archeologically the roots of four great doctrines 
associated with the person of Jesus—the Virgin Birth, 
the Descent into Hades, the Resurrection, and the 
Ascension. The inscriptions reveal to you the very 
language of Christianity in the making. The hymns 
and liturgies of other faiths derive their strength from 
similar ideas, and express similar aspirations. Does 
Jesus, according to the Gospels, give sight to the blind, 
and call the dead back to life? So does Asculapius. 
He, too, is wondrously born; he, too, is in danger in 
his infancy. He, too, heals the sick and raises the dead, 
till Zeus, jealous of this infringement of his preroga- 
tives, smites him with his thunderbolt, and translates 
him to the world above. But from his heavenly seat 
he continues to exercise his healing power. His worship 
spreads all through Greece. After a great plague in 
Rome, in 291 B.c., it is planted on a sacred island in the 
Tiber. In the first century of our era you may follow 
it all round the Eastern Mediterranean. In Greece 
alone Pausanias mentions sixty-three Asklepieia. There 
were others in Asia Minor, Egypt, Sicily; nearly two 
hundred being still traceable. They were both sanc- 

1 “Christianity in the Light of Historical Science,” in The 
Examiner (London), Oct. 21, 1905, pp. 668 ff. 


THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 469 


tuaries and medical schools. A number of inscriptions 
relate details of cures, or consecrate the ex-votos, which 
are still dedicated at Loretto or Lourdes. The temple 
by the Tiber won special fame in the reign of Anto- 
ninus Pius, for the restoration of the sight of a blind 
man. Aisculapius himself bears the titles ‘king’ and 
Geds cwr7p, ‘divine saviour, He was even cwrip Tar 
dAwy, ‘saviour of the universe.” In his cosmic signi- 
ficance he was thus identified- with Zeus himself, and 
on earth he was felt to be ‘most loving to man’ (cp, Tit. 
iii, 4). Harnack, in one of the fascinating chapters of 
his Expansion of Christianity, has traced the action of 
these influences on later Christianity conceived as a 
religion of healing or salvation, medicine alike of body 
and of mind. It must be enough now to remind you 
that the god was believed to reveal himself to those 
who sought his aid, and Origen affirms that a great 
multitude, both of Greeks and barbarians, acknowledge 
that they ‘have frequently seen, and stil see, no mere 
phantom, but Asculapius himself, healing and doing 
good, and foretelling the future.’” 
But to pass on to the Trismegistic Asclepius. 


ASCLEPIUS IN TRISMEGISTIC TRADITION 


Asclepius comes forward in our literature as the type 
of a disciple of Trismegistus already trained in philo- 
sophy. This prior training must presumably be referred 
to the Ptah-tradition—Ptah being himself a God of 
Revelation, that is of teaching by means of apocalypsis, 
and Asclepius being originally his “son” and “ priest.” 
But not only was Ptah a God of apocalypsis generally, 
but also a God of medicine, as he must needs have been 
for his son to have learned his wisdom from him. 


470 . THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


This view is brought out in a Hellenistic text which 
reads as follows: 

“ A Remedy from the shrines of Hephestus [Ptah] at 
Memphis interpreted by the decision and owing to the 
philanthropy, they say, of Thrice-greatest Hermes; for 
he decided that it should be published with a view to 
man’s saving. It was found on a golden tablet written 
in Egyptian characters.” + 

The tradition of the date when Asclepius was admitted 
to the Trismegistic discipline is given in K. K., 3 
(Stob., He. i 49; W. p. 387, 1). After the ascension 
of Hermes, we are told: 

“To him succeeded Tat, who was at once his son and 
heir unto these knowledges; and not long afterwards 
Asclepius-Imuth, according to the will of Ptah who 
is Hephestus.” 

What precise historical worth this tradition may 
contain, it is impossible to say; all we can suppose is 
that there was at some early date a union of two 
schools of mystic discipline belonging respectively to 
the Thebaic and Memphitic traditions. This union 
may have been somewhat analogous to that of the 
disciples of John the Baptist and of Jesus. What is 
clear, however, from our Trismegistic writings, is that 
there is no doubt whatever in the writer’s mind that 
the Trismegistic tradition is in possession of the higher 
wisdom; and, indeed, C. #., xiii. (xiv.) distinctly 
allows us to conclude that though, Tat was younger, in 
so far as he had not the technical training of the 
Asclepius-grade, it is nevertheless Tat, when he reaches 
“manhood,” and not Asclepius, yiag succeeds to the 
mastership of the School. 

Nevertheless we find a number of Trismegistic 
writings, presupposed especially in “The Definitions of 

1 Cod. Antinori 101, fol. 361. 


THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 471 


Asclepius” and in “The Perfect Sermon,” in which both 
Tat and Asclepius share in a common instruction— 
Asclepius appearing as the older and riper scholar. 

This makes Reitzenstein (p. 122) suppose that this 
type of what we may call a company of two disciples 
was invented by the Hermes priests at Thebes, and that 
it was later on taken over by the Memphitic Ptah- 
Asclepius priests and developed in their own interest. 

This may be so if we must be compelled to speculate 
on the dim shades of history which may be recovered 
from these obscure indications. 


CONCERNING AMMON 


Of the Trismegistic writings of Asclepius, Lactantius 
(D. L, ii. 15, '7) mentions a “ Perfect Sermon” to the 
King (Ammon), and also refers to a rich ancient 
literature by Asclepius addressed to the same king. 

Reitzenstein (p. 123), moreover, says that C. Z#., 
(xvii.) presupposes writings addressed to the same 
King Ammon by Tat; but I gather that the persons 
of the dialogue are really Asclepius and the King, and 
not Tat, and that Tat has been substituted for 
Asclepius by some copyist in error. 

However this may be, there was a large literature 
addressed by Hermes himself to Ammon, as we may 
_ gee from the distinct statement in P. S. A.,i. 2, and also 
from Stobeus, Exx.. xii—xix. The same tradition is 
preserved in the presumably later Hermetic: treatise, 
Iatromathematica, which -is also addressed to Ammon.? 

1 Probably our C. H. (xvi.). 

2 Camerarius, Astrologica (Niirnberg, 1537); Hermetis Iatro- © 
math,, ed. Hoeschel (1597) ; Ideler, Physici et Medici Graect Minores, 
i. 387 and 430. Iatromathematici were those who practised 


medicine in conjunction with astrology, as was done in Egypt 
(Procl., Paraph. Ptol., p. 24). 


472 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


PROPHET AND KING 


Here, then, we have another type of literature, and 
that, too, very ancient, in which the wise Priest and 
Prophet is set over against the King as teacher or 
discoverer of hidden wisdom. This we have already 
seen to have been the relationship between the Priest 
and Prophet Petosiris and King Nechepso. But the 
type goes still further back to pre-Greek times in 
Egypt. It was, as we have learned from Plutarch, who 
probably hands on the information direct from Manetho, 
a necessity that the King, to be a true King, should be 
initiated into the wisdom of the Priests. 

As we have already seen, Imuth-Asclepius appears 
in Manetho as an inventor, so also in the charming 
story put into the mouth of Socrates by Plato in his 
Phedrus (274c) about “the famous old God whose 
name was Theuth,’—Thoth is the inventor par excellence. 
In this story—which elicits the remark from Pheedrus: 
“Yes, Socrates, you can easily invent tales of Egypt, 
or of any other country ”"—Thoth takes his inventions 
to a certain King Thamus for his approval or dis- 
approval, as to whether or no the Egyptians might 
be allowed the benefit of them. This Thamus was 
“King of the whole country of Egypt, and dwelt in 
that great city of upper Egypt which the Hellenes call 
Egyptian Thebes, and the God Himself is called by 
them Ammon.” 

In Hecatzus, also, Osiris, King of Thebes, has all 
inventions laid before him, and gives special honour to 
Hermes whose inventions were far and wide renowned.! 

In this connection it is to be noted that in the 
Theban Thoth-cult, Thoth was regarded as the Repre- 


1 Diodor., I 15, 16. 


THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 473 


sentative of the King and Light-God Ra (or Ammon). 
And so we read on the tomb of Seti I.: 

“Thou art in my place, my representative. Wherefore 
are thou moreover called Thoth, Representative of the 
Light-God Ra.” ? 

From these and other indications it is quite possible 
to conclude that Plato has used an ancient Egyptian 
logos as the basis of his story, and that this Jogos at a 
very early period found an echo in written instructions 
given by Thoth to the King. 

All this took place on purely Egyptian ground, and 
hence the type of instruction from Thoth-Hermes to 
Ammon was fairly established in tradition before it was 
taken over by our Hellenistic Trismegistic writers. 


AMENHOTEP-ASCLEPIUS 


So far, however, I believe, no reference to books 
written by Imhotep (Asclepius) to Ammon in the 
pre-Greek period has been discovered. Sethe,? how- 
ever, tells us that a certain Amenhotep who lived as 
early as the fifteenth century B.c., was a disciple and seer 
of Thoth. This Amenhotep was famous as a teacher 
of wisdom and discoverer of magic books; he was 
probably also renowned for his own writings as well. 
Gradually this Amenhotep became blended with 
Imhotep-Asclepius as his twin-brother, and finally in 
Ptolemaic times received divine honours at Thebes. 
Here, then, we have the blending in of another tradition, 
of a writer of books who was a disciple of Thoth, and 
was gradually confounded with Asclepius-Imuth, son of 
Ptah. And that there were two Asclepiuses, an older 
and a later, we are told distinctly by P. S. A., xxxvii, 3. 


1 Brugsch, Religion w. Myth. d. alt. Ag., p. 451. 
2 Op. sup. cit., ibid. 


474 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


Of the Sayings of this Asclepius a Greek porcelain! 
gives us some idea. The first three Sayings, however, 
are simply taken from the Sayings of the Seven Sages 
of Greece; the rest may be partially Egyptian. This 
scrap of evidence, however, is of importance; for already 
in the third century B.c., Orphic Sayings are known to 
have been worked up with Egyptian material, and here 
we have Greek gnomic material blended with an 
Egyptian Imuth-tradition of Sayings. 

Perhaps still more careful research may reward us 
with further side-lights on the development of this 
Asclepius-literature prior to the Greek period, and in 
its earliest Hellenistic forms. As it is, we are left with 
the impression that the traces which have been already 
discovered, justify the remarks made by the writer of 
our Trismegistic “Definitions of Asclepius unto the 
King” or “The Perfect Sermon of Asclepius unto the 
King ”—C. H., (xvi.)—as based upon a well-established 
tradition in the School, concerning the change brought 
about by putting the Egyptian forms of the Asclepian 
writings, which were of a very mystical nature, into 
the more precise forms of the Greek tongue. 


THE SacreD Group or Four 


What, however, is clear in “The Perfect Sermon” of 
Hermes himself, where he gives instruction to his three 
disciples, Asclepius, Tat and Ammon, assembled in the 
“holy place,” is that the history of the matter is of 
small moment to the writer of that Sermon. He is 
dealing with the inner and more intimate side of the 
teaching. Asclepius, Tat and Ammon are for him the 
sacred triad, forming with the Master himself the 
“sacred group of four” (P. S. A., i. 2). 


! Published by Wilcken in the “ Festschrift fiir Ebers,” pp. 142 ff. 


THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 475 


With this we may very well compare the group of 
three made so familiar to us by the Evangelists—the 
three who were always with the Master in the most 
intimate moments of His inner life and exaltation— 
James, John and Peter. 

Now, if the reader will refer to my notes on the last 
paragraph of Hippolytus’ Introduction to the Naassene 
document, he will see that Clement of Alexandria 
expressly asserts that: 

“The Lord imparted the Gnosis to James the Just, to 
John and Peter, after His Resurrection ; these delivered 
it to the rest of the Apostles, and they to the Seventy.” 


JAMES, JOHN AND PETER 


Here I would suggest that we have a similarity of 
conception. Asclepius is the main subsequent teacher, 
even as James is, in Christian tradition; Peter is the 
organiser, to whom the rulership over the Church is 
given—he represents the king-power,and may be equated 
with Ammon; while John is the Beloved even as is Tat. 

John understands the spirit of the teaching best of all ; 
James is more learned on the formal side; while Peter 
is the organiser, and in many an apocryphal story is made 
to display lack of control and want. of understanding. 

A most interesting scrap of Johannine tradition will 
throw some further light on the fact that John 
succeeded to the spiritual directorship, even as Tat, in 
our sermons, succeeds to Trismegistus. 

This scrap is an addition to John xvii. 26, from a 
Codex of the Fourth Gospel, preserved in the Archives 
of the Templars of St John of Jerusalem in Paris:1 


1 Given by Thilo, Codex Apocryphus Novi Testamenti (Leipzig, 
1832), p. 880. Of. Pick (B.), The Extra-Canonical Life of Christ 
(New York, 1903), p. 279. 


476 * 'THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 


“Ye have heard what I said unto you: I am not of 
this world, the Comforter is among you, teach through 
the Comforter. As the Father has sent Me, even so 
send J you. Amen,I say unto you, I am not of this 
world; but John shall be your Father, till he shall go 
with Me into Paradise. And He anointed them with 
the Holy Spirit.” 

So also in an addition to John xix. 26-30, we read: 

“He saith to His mother, Weep not; I go to My 
Father and to Eternal Life. Behold thy son! He 
will keep My place. Then saith He to the disciple, 
Behold thy mother! Then bowing His head He gave 
up the Ghost.” 

Here then at the Supreme Crisis the Master con- 
stitutes John the spiritual Father of the School in His 
place. So is it with Tat. 


THE TRIAD OF DISCIPLES 


The idea of triads and other groups (¢.g. of five and 
seven) united in the Presence of a Master, is familiar to 
the student of Druidical mysticism. In our “ Perfect 
Sermon” we have such a triad, each disciple dis- 
tinguished by strongly-marked characteristics; the 
tuning of these into one harmony, so that, to use 
another and a familiar simile, the disciples may be as 
the fingers of one hand, for the Master’s use, is a matter 
of enormous difficulty. One is characterised by Power, 
another by Knowledge, and another by Love. All 
three must sink their individually strongest character- 
istic in a supreme sacrifice, where all blend together 
into the Wisdom of the Master. This seems to me to 
be the inner purport of our “Perfect Sermon,” and 
whatever may be the history of the evolution of the 


THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST-HERMES 477 


forms of the literature, the eternal fact of the nature of 
the intimate teaching of the Christ to the Three was 
known to our writer. 


CHNUM THE Goop DAIMON 


Let us now turn to the type of Trismegistic literature 
in which Osiris and Isis came forward as disciples; and 
first of all let us take a glance at the God Chnum, 
Chnubis, or Chnuphis (Knuphis), whose name occurs in 
so many of the Abraxas and Abraxoid gems, 

Chnum was for Southern Egypt precisely what Ptah 
of Memphis was for Northern Egypt. He was the 
Fashioner of men, even as a potter makes pots on a 
wheel. Chnum was Demiurge and God of the heart. 
The chief centre of his cult was at Syene and the Island 
of Elephantine. Here he was regarded as the Father 
of Osiris. And so we hear of astrological dialogues 
between Chnum and Osiris, as, for instance, when we 
are told: 

“And all that Kouphis, who is with them [the 
Egyptians], the Good Daimon, handed on, and his 
disciple Osiris philosophized.” 4 

These writings were grouped with those of Nechepso, 
and also with our Trismegistic writings. Compare the 
passage in Firmicus Maternus which runs: 

“ All things which Mercurius (Hermes) and Chnubis 
[?] handed on to Aisculapius (Asclepius), which Petosiris 
discovered and Nechepso.” ? 


1 Cramer, Anecd, Ox., iii. 171, 20. 
2 Fir. Mat., iv. proem. 5 (Skutsch and Kroll, p. 196, 21). 
'‘ The “and Chnubis” is the emendation of R, for the unintelligible 
letters “einhnusuizx.” _ 


478 THRICE-GREATEST-HERMES 


OsirIs DISCIPLE OF AGATHODAIMON THE 
THRICE-GREATEST 


The Patristic references to our Trismegistic literature 
further imform us that Osiris was regarded as the dis- 
ciple of Agathodaimon, who in them bears the name of 
Thrice-greatest.!. There is, however, nothing to show 
that Hermes himself appears in them as the disciple of 
Chnubis, as Reitzenstein says (p. 126). The intro- 
ductory phrase of Lactantius to Frag. xix. runs: “ But 
I [L.] will call to mind the words of Hermes the Thrice- 
greatest; in the ‘To Asclepius’ he says: ‘ Osiris said : 
How, then, O thou Thrice-greatest, [thou] Good Daimon, 
did Earth in its entirety appear ?’” 

Here we have a sermon of Hermes quoting from a 
tradition in which Osiris appears as the disciple of 
Agathodaimon, who is also called Trismegistus ; that is, 
the Agathodaimon-Osiris Dialogue type was old, and 
presumably pertained to one of the earliest forms of the 
Trismegistic literature, probably contemporary with the 
most ancient Poemandres type. This type seems to have 
borne impressions of the form of the “ Books of the 
Chaldeans” type of cosmogenesis, which we have seen 
to have strongly influenced Petosiris and Nechepso in 
the early second century B.C. 

Agathodaimon is to Osiris as Pemandres to Hermes. 


Locos-MIND THE Goop DAIMOoN 


So also in the early Alchemical literature there is a 
treatise of Agathodaimon addressed to Osiris, and in 
it others are presupposed.2 These Alchemical teachings 
of the Good Daimon are frequently in close contact with 


1 Of. Lactantius Fragg., xiv., xix., xxi., xxii. 
2 Berthelot, Les Alchimistes grecs, Texte, p. 268. 


THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 479 


our Trismegistic doctrines ; moreover, in the same litera- 
ture, Hermes refers to Agathodaimon and appears to 
regard himself as his disciple It thus may be sup- 
posed that it was from Chnum that was originally 
derived the tradition of the Agathodaimonites. So 
thinks Reitzenstein; but I do not think that we have 
sufficient evidence as yet for so general a conclusion, 
The term Agathodaimon is a very general one, it is true, 
but the whole idea cannot be refunded into Chnum; in 
fact, Osiris is quite as much Agathodaimon as Chnum, 
and in C. H., xii. (xiii.), which deals with the General 
Mind, Good Mind, or Good Daimon, Agathodaimon is 
taken in the most general sense, and in the three quota- 
tions there made by Hermes from the “Sayings of the 
Good Daimon” (§§ 1, 8, 13),? we find that they are in 
the words of Heracleitus as inspired by the Logos; so 
that in reality Agathodaimon must be equated with 
Logos. The origin of Agathodaimon is then not solely 
Chnum ; and Hermes therefore cannot be spoken of as 
the disciple of Chnubis, unless we can cite texts in 
which Thoth is so described. 

In our Trismegistic literature the teaching is quite 
simple and distinct ; as, for instance, in C. H., x. (xi.) 23: 
“ He [Mind] is the Good Daimon.” 

When, however, Reitzenstein (p. 128) declares that 
the sentence in § 25 of the same sermon, “ For this 
cause Can a man dare say that man on earth is God 
subject to death, while God in heaven is man from 
death immune,”* is a saying belonging to the Chnu- 

1 Op. cit., pp. 125, 156-263. 

2 We meet with a similar collection of Sayings, or Summaries 
of the chief points of teaching, in the Stobean Ex. i. 7 ff., belong- 
ing to the Tat-literature, and also in U, H., x. (xi.), xiv. (xv.), and 

XV1.). 
’ es similar phrase occurs in Dio Cassius, Fr. 30; i. 87, 
ed. Boiss, 


480 THRICE-GREATEST-HERMES 


phis-literature, we think he is going beyond the limits of 
probable conjecture, unless we substitute for Chnuphis 
the general term Agathodaimon in the sense of 
Logos. 

When again Reitzenstein (p. 129) says that the frag- 
ments he has adduced show that Hermes was a later 
addition in the Agathodaimon-literature, and gradually 
pushed on one side Osiris the Son of the God.of Revela- 
tion, we are not convinced that we have correctly 
recovered the “history ””—for in the great Osiris-myth 
it is Hermes who is always the teacher of wisdom and 
not Osiris. 


CunuM Goop MIND THE AXON 


Nevertheless that a wide-spread Chnuphis-literature, 
in the Agathodaimonistic sense, existed prior to the 
second century B.C., Reitzenstein has shown by a 
number of interesting quotations (pp. 129-133). In 
Hellenistic times the worship of Chnuphis as the Primal 
Deity and God of Revelation was strongly established, 
and, most interesting of all for us, his symbol was the 
serpent. The symbol, then, of Agathodaimon as Logos 
was the Serpent of Wisdom, and we are in contact with 
the line of tradition of the Gnostic Ophites and Naas- 
senes. And so also in Ptolemaic times we find his 
syzygy, Isis, also symbolised as a serpent, and both of 
them frequently as serpents with human heads; they are 
both “as wise as serpents.” And as Horus was their son, 
so we find the hawk-headed symbol of that God united 
with a serpent body. So also we find Agathodaimon, in 
his sun-aspect, symbolised as a serpent with a lion’s 
head! He is the on, 


1 See the Nechepso Fragment 29 (Riess, p. 379). 


THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 481 


Isis, LaDy oF WIspoM, DIscIPLE oF THRICE-GREATEST 
HERMES 


In addition to the types of Hermes and his disciples, 
and Agathodaimon and his disciples, we have also in 
our Trismegistic literature another type—namely, Isis 
and her disciples. Isis is the ancient Lady of all 
wisdom, and Teacher of all magic. In the early Hellen- 
istic period she is substituted for Hermes as Orderer of 
the cosmos,! while Plutarch calls her Lady of the Heart 
and Tongue even as is Hermes.2 She “sees” the 
teaching. 

As her disciple, she has in the Stobean Ex. xxxi? a 
king, probably King Ammon. 

In a Magic Papyrus she even: appears as teacher of 
Asclepius.* But the more usual and natural type is- 
that of Isis as teacher of her son Horus, and so we find 
Lucian speaking of Pythagoras visiting Egypt to learn 
wisdom of her prophets, and saying that the sage of 
Samos descended into the adyta and learned the 
Books of Horus and Isis.5 To this type of literature 
belongs our lengthy Stobean Exx. xxv.-xxvii. 

But in all of this Isis owes her wisdom to face 
to face instruction by the most ancient Hermes, with 
whom she gets into contact through spiritual vision, All 
this I have discussed in the Commentaries to Exx. xxv.- 
xxvii.; the conclusion being that to the mind of the 
Poemandrists, no matter how ancient might be any line 
of tradition, whether of Agathodaimon or Osiris or Isis, 
the direct teaching of the Mind transcended it. 

1 R., Zwei relig. Frag., 104 ff. 2 De Is, et Os., xlviii. 

8 With heading: “Of Hermes from the [Sermon] of Isis to 
Horus,” 


4 Wessely, Denkschr. d. K. K, Akad. (1893), p. 41, 1. 633. 
5 Alectruon, 18. 


VOL. I, 31 


aoe 


Pres eh 


PRINTED BY 
NEILL AND COMPANY, LIMITED, 
EDINBURGH. 


ee 


hes 
a0 


Digitized by Microsoft ® 


Digitized by Microsoft ® 


Digitized by Microsoft ® 


Digitized by Microsoft ® 


eee tees GI Hh Ft ee. 


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 


> 
me te 


Fa 
mete pert oe 



========================================
VOLUME II — THE CORPUS HERMETICUM
========================================

Thrice-Greatest Hermes 

Studies in Hellenistic Theosophy and Gnosis 

Being a Translation of the Extant Sermons and Fragments of the Trismegistic 
Literature, with Prolegomena, Commentaries, and Notes 



By 

G. R. S. Mead 

London and Benares 
The Theosophical Publishing Society 
[ 1906 ] 








Contents 


I Corpus Hermeticum 1 

CORPUS HERMETICUM 1 3 

PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 3 

COMMENTARY 15 

OF VISION AND APOCALYPSIS 15 

THE GREAT AND LITTLE MAN 16 

THE PRESENCE 17 

THE VISION OF CREATION 17 

THE DESCENT OF THE LOGOS 18 

THE REVELATION OF THE PLEROMA 19 

THE SECOND EMANATION 21 

THE DESCENT OF MAN 22 

THE FIRST MEN 23 

“INCREASE AND MULTIPLY” 24 

LOVE 25 

THE WAY OF DEATHLESSNESS 25 

THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 26 

THE EIGHTH SPHERE 26 

THE THREE “BODIES” OF THE BUDDHA 27 

THE PREACHING OF THE GNOSIS 29 

A HYMN OF PRAISE AND PRAYER FOR THE GNOSIS 30 

THE NAME "POIMANDRES” 31 

THE GOOD SHEPHERD 32 

CORPUS HERMETICUM II 35 

THE GENERAL SERMON 35 

CORPUS HERMETICUM II. (III.) 36 

TO ASCLEPIUS 36 

COMMENTARY 42 

“AN INTRODUCTION TO THE GNOSIS OF THE NATURE OF ALL THINGS” 42 

SPACE IS A PLENUM 43 

THE SPOUSE OF DEITY 44 

GOD IS CAUSE THAT SPIRIT IS 44 

HE WHO IS WITHOUT A WIFE IS HALF A MAN 45 

CORPUS HERMETICUM III. (IV.) 46 

THE SACRED SERMON 46 

COMMENTARY 48 

TEXT AND TITLE 48 

THE TRINITY 48 

FROM THE SYSTEM OF THE NICOLAITANS 49 

THE "BOOKS OF THE CHALD7EANS” 49 

THE “FLOOD” 50 

CORPUS HERMETICUM IV. (V.) 52 

THE CUP OR MONAD 52 

COMMENTARY 56 

THE TITLE 56 

THE BAPTISM OF THE MIND 57 

THE HOLY GRAIL 57 

THE "HATING OF THE BODY” 58 

THE GNOSIS AND ITS BLESSINGS 59 

THE ANCIENT PATH 60 

CORPUS HERMETICUM V. (VI.) 61 

THOUGH UNMANIFEST GOD IS MOST MANIFEST 61 

COMMENTARY 65 

THE TITLE 65 



MAYA 66 

THE HIGHER PANTHEISM OR PANMONISM 67 

HYMN TO ALL-GOD 67 

CORPUS HERMETICUM VI. (VII.) 68 

IN GOD ALONE IS GOOD AND ELSEWHERE NOWHERE 68 

COMMENTARY 71 

THE TITLE 71 

DUALISM? 71 

GOD THE PLEROMA OF GOOD 73 

CORPUS HERMETICUM VII. (VIII.) 75 

THE GREATEST ILL AMONG MEN IS IGNORANCE OF GOD 75 

COMMENTARY 76 

A PREACHING 76 

THE PROBABLE COMPLETION OF AN OXYRHYNCHUS LOGION 76 

CORPUS HERMETICUM VIII. (IX.) 78 

THAT NO ONE OF EXISTING THINGS DOTH PERISH, BUT MEN IN ERROR 

SPEAK OF THEIR CHANGES AS DESTRUCTIONS AND AS DEATHS 78 

COMMENTARY 80 

THE COSMOS AS “SECOND GOD” 80 

THE LAW OF APOKATASTASIS 81 

CORPUS HERMETICUM IX. (X.) 82 

ON THOUGHT AND SENSE 82 

COMMENTARY 86 

TITLE AND ORDERING 86 

“SENSE -AND-THOUGHT” 87 

THOSE IN GNOSIS 87 

THE TRUE GNOSTIC 88 

THE GOAL OF THE GNOSIS 88 

THE POSSIBILITY OF KNOWING GOD 89 

CORPUS HERMETICUM X. (XI.) 90 

THE KEY 90 

COMMENTARY 102 

THE CONSUMMATION OF THE “GENERAL SERMONS” 102 

THE WILL OF GOD 103 

OF GNOSIS AND ECSTASIS 103 

OF APOTHEOSIS 104 

THE METAMORPHOSES OF THE SOUL 105 

THE LADDER OF BEING 105 

CONCERNING TRANSMIGRATION 106 

GNOSIS THE VIRTUE OF THE SOUL 107 

THE VEHICLES OF THE SOUL 107 

THE DUAL SOUL 108 

"HE WHO STANDS” 108 

THE OLYMPIAN PATH 109 

“WHEN MIND BECOMES A DAIMON” 109 

THE “SCOURGE” OF THE CHRIST 110 

THE DISPENSATION OF THE UNIVERSE 110 

CORPUS HERMETICUM XI. (XII.) 112 

MIND UNTO HERMES 112 

COMMENTARY 122 

TITLE AND FORM 122 

THE 7EON-LORE 123 

THE ROOT OF FORM 124 

"BECOME ALL THINGS” 125 

THE GOOD’S OWN PATH 126 

CONCERNING INDIA 126 



CORPUS HERMETICUM XII. (XIII.) 128 

ABOUT THE COMMON MIND 128 

COMMENTARY 138 

THE SAYINGS OF THE GOOD DAIMON 138 

HERMES AND BASILIDES 139 

THE SERMONS ON FATE 140 

MATERIALITY AND CORPORALITY ARE ENERGIES OF GOD 141 

CORPUS HERMETICUM XIII. (XIV.) 142 

THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 142 

THE SECRET HYMNODY 149 

COMMENTARY 152 

CONCERNING THE TITLE 152 

THE TERM APOCRYPHON 152 

THE THREE STAGES OF PROBATION 153 

THE HOLY MOUNT OF INITIATION 154 

THE BIRTH FROM ABOVE 155 

THE VIRGIN BIRTH 155 

THE RACE OF THE LOGOS 156 

THE SELF-TAUGHT 156 

THE NEW CREATION 157 

THE WAY OF BIRTH IN GOD 157 

OF THE TEN AND THE TWELVE 158 

THE DAWN OF COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS 161 

THE VOW OF SILENCE 161 

OFTHEOGDOAD 161 

A HYMN FOR MORNING AND FOR EVENING PRAYER 162 

“THROUGH THE WORD” 164 

CORPUS HERMETICUM XIV. (XV.) 165 

[A LETTER] OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES TO ASCLEPIUS 165 

COMMENTARY 169 

ASCLEPIUS AND TAT 169 

COMPARE WITH “MIND UNTO HERMES” 170 

THE GOOD HUSBANDMAN 170 

CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVI.) 171 

THE DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS UNTO KING AMMON 171 

COMMENTARY 178 

CONCERNING THE TITLE 178 

A TRADITION CONCERNING THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 179 

A SPECULATION AS TO DATE 180 

THE DELINEATION OF THE SUN 181 

CONCERNING THE DAIMONES 181 

CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVII.) 183 

COMMENTARY 184 

ON THE ADORATION OF IMAGES 184 

CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVIII.) 185 

[THE ENCOMIUM OF KINGS] 185 

(ABOUT THE SOUL’S BEING HINDERED BY THE PASSION OF THE BODY) 185 

(ABOUT THE BLESSING OF THE BETTER [ONE] AND PRAISING OF THE KING) 189 

COMMENTARY 192 

THE APOLOGY OF A PCEMANDRIST 192 

SPECULATIONS AS TO DATE 192 

THE STORY OF THE PYTHIC GRASSHOPPER 193 

THE TRUE KING 194 

THE FELLOW-RULERS OF THE HEIGHT 194 

II The Perfect Sermon 195 

THE PERFECT SERMON 196 



OR THE ASCLEPIUS 196 

I 196 

II 197 

III 198 

IV 199 

V 200 

VI 201 

VII 203 

VIII 204 

IX 206 

X 207 

XI 208 

XII 210 

XIII 211 

XIV 212 

XV 213 

XVI 214 

XVII 215 

XVIII 216 

XIX 217 

XX 219 

XXI 221 

XXII 222 

XXIII 223 

XXIV 225 

XXV 226 

XXVI 228 

XXVII 229 

XXVIII 231 

XXIX 233 

XXX 234 

XXXI 236 

XXXII 237 

XXXIII 239 

XXXIV 241 

XXXV 242 

XXXVI 243 

XXXVIII 246 

XXXIX 246 

XL 247 

XLI 249 

COMMENTARY 251 

THE TITLE 251 

THE OLD LATIN TRANSLATION AND THE GREEK ORIGINAL 251 

OF THE WRITER AND THE PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE 252 

THE DOCTRINE OF THE WILL OF GOD 253 

CONCERNING SPIRIT AND THE ALL-SENSE 254 

THE PROPHETIC UTTERANCES 255 

THE PROSCRIPTION OF THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 256 

THE LAST HOPE OF THE RELIGION OF THE MIND 257 



I 

Corpus Hermeticum 



- 1 - 



- 2 - 




CORPUS HERMETICUM I. 
PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 
(Text: R. 328-338; P. 1-18; Pat 5b-8.f 

1 . 



T chanced once on a time my mind was 
meditating on the things that are 1 2 , my thought 
was raised to a great height, the senses of my 
body being held back - just as men are who are weighed 
down with sleep after a fill of food, or from fatigue of 
body. 


Methought a Being more than vast, in size beyond all 
bounds, called out my name and saith: What wouldst thou 
hear and see, and what hast thou in mind to learn and 
know? 


2. And I do say: Who art thou? 

He saith: I am Man-Shepherd 7 , Mind of all master-hood 4 5 ; 
I know what thou desirest and I’m with thee everywhere. 

3. [And] I reply: I long to learn the things that are, and 
comprehend their nature, and know God. This is, I said, 
what I desire to hear. 


He answered back to me: Hold in thy mind all thou 
wouldst know, and I will teach thee. 

4. E’en with these words His aspect changed 3 , and 
straightway, in the twinkling of an eye, all things were 
opened to me, and I see a Vision limitless, all things 
turned into Light, - sweet, joyous [Light]. And I became 
transported as I gazed. 


1 P. = Parthey (G.), Hermetis Trismegisti Poemander (Berlin; 1854). Pat. = Patrizzi (F.), Nova de Universis Philosophia 
(Venice; 1593). 

2 Ttsgi xcov OVTCOV.. 

3 noifravSgrig. 

4 0 ifj? aUOsvxla? voU?. The aUOevxla was the snmma potestas of all things; see R. 8, n. 1; and § 30 below. Cf. also C. H., 
xiii. (xiv.) 15. 

5 r)Uay)'] xj) l8sQ. 


- 3 - 



But in a little while Darkness came settling down on part 
[of it], awesome and gloomy, coiling in sinuous folds 6 , so 
that methought it like unto a snake 7 . 

And then the Darkness changed into some sort of a Moist 
Nature, tossed about beyond all power of words, belching 
out smoke as from a fire, and groaning forth a wailing 
sound that beggars all description. 

[And] after that an outcry inarticulate came forth from it, 
as though it were a Voice of Fire. 

5. [Thereon] out of the Light . . 8 . . a Holy Word 
(Logos) 9 descended on that Nature. And upwards to the 
height from the Moist Nature leaped forth pure Fire; light 
was it, swift and active too. 

The Air, too, being light, followed after the Fire; from out 
the Earth-and-Water rising up to Fire so that it seemed to 
hang therefrom. 

But Earth-and-Water stayed so mingled each with other, 
that Earth from Water no one could discern 111 . Yet were 
they moved to hear by reason of the Spirit-Word (Logos) 
pervading them. 

6. Then saith to me Man-Shepherd: Didst understand this 
Vision what it means? 

Nay; that shall I know, I said. 

That Light, He said, am I, thy God, Mind, prior to Moist 
Nature which appeared from Darkness; the Light-Word 
(Logos) [that appeared] from Mind is Son of God. 

What then? - say I. 

Know that what sees in thee 11 and hears is the Lord’s 
Word (Logos); but Mind is Father-God. Not separate are 


6 axokiGOc; Eansigafjisvov. The sense is by no means certain. Menard translates “de form sinueusi Everard, “coming 
down obliquely”; Chambers, “sinuously terminated.” But f. in the Sethian system “the sinuous Water - that is, 
Darkness (see Hipp., Philos., v. 19). 

7 Cf. Hipp., Philos., v. 9 (S. 170, 71): “They say the Serpent is the Moist Essence.” 

8 A lacuna of six letters in the text. 

9 The idea of the Logos was the central concept of Hellenistic theology; it was thus a word of many meanings, 
signifying chiefly Reason and Word, but also much else. I have accordingly throughout added the term Logos after the 
English equivalent most suitable to the context. 

10 Cf. II, vii. 99, as quoted by Apion in the chapter “Concerning the iEon” as Comment, on C. H., xi. (xii.). 

11 That is, in vision. 


- 4 - 



they the one from other; just in their union [rather] is it 
Life consists. 

Thanks be to Thee, I said. 

So, understand the Light [He answered], and make friends 
with it. 

7. And speaking thus He gazed for long into my eyes 12 , so 
that I trembled at the look of Him. 

But when He raised His head, I see in Mind the Light, 
[but] now in Powers no man could number, and 
Cosmos 11 grown beyond all bounds, and that the Fire was 
compassed round about by a most mighty Power, and 
[now] subdued had come unto a stand. 

And when I saw these things I understood by reason of 
Man-Shepherd’s Word (Logos). 

8. But as I was in great astonishment, He saith to me 
again: Thou didst behold in Mind the Archetypal Form 
whose being is before beginning without end. Thus spake 
to me Man-Shepherd. 

And I say: Whence then have Nature’s elements their 
being? 

To this He answer gives: From Will of God. [Nature 14 ] 
received the Word (Logos), and gazing on the Cosmos 
Beautiful 11 did copy it, making herself into a cosmos, by 
means of her own elements and by the births of souls. 

9. And God-the-Mind, being male and female both, as 
Light and Life subsisting, brought forth another Mind to 
give things form, who, God as he was of Fire and 
Spirit 16 , formed Seven Rulers who enclose the cosmos that 
the sense perceives 17 . Men call their ruling Fate 18 . 


12 Cf. C. H„ xi (xii) 6. 

13 xoapov. The word kosnios (world-order) means either “order” or “world”; and in the original there is frequently a 
play upon the two meanings, as in the case of logos. 

14 Nature and God’s Will are identical. 

15 That is, the ideal world-order in the realms of reality. 

16 Presumably the Pure Air of § 3. 

17 xOv ala07]TOv xoapov. The sensible or manifested world, our present universe, as distinguished from the ideal 
eternal universe, the type of all universes. 

18 slpagpevt]. 


-5 - 



10. Straightway from out the downward elements God’s 
Reason (Logos 19 ) leaped up to Nature’s pure formation, 
and was at-oned with the Formative Mind; for it was co- 
essential with it 20 . And Nature’s downward elements were 
thus left reason-less, so as to be pure matter. 

11. Then the Formative Mind ([at-oned] with Reason), he 
who surrounds the spheres and spins them with his whirl, 
set turning his formations, and let them turn from a 
beginning boundless unto an endless end. For that the 
circulation of these [spheres] begins where it doth end, as 
Mind doth will. 

And from the downward elements Nature brought forth 
lives reason-less; for He did not extend the Reason 
(Logos) [to them]. The Air brought forth things winged; 
the Water things that swim, and Earth-and-Water one 
from another parted, as Mind willed. And from her 
bosom Earth produced what lives she had, four-footed 
things and reptiles, beasts wild and tame. 

12. But All-Father Mind, being Life and Light, did bring 
forth Man 21 co-equal to Himself, with whom He fell in 
love, as being His own child; for he was beautiful beyond 
compare, the Image of his Sire. In very truth, God fell in 
love with His own Form 22 ; and on him did bestow all of 
His own formations. 

13. And when he gazed upon what the Enformer had 
created in the Father, [Man] too wished to enform; and 
[so] assent was given him by the Father 2 ’. 

Changing his state to the formative sphere 24 , in that he 
was to have his whole authority 25 , he gazed upon his 


19 The Logos which had previously descended into Nature. 

20 Opoouaio?, usually translated “consubstantial”; but oUoia is “essence” and “being” rather than “substance.” 

21 The Prototype, Cosmic, Ideal or Perfect Man. 

22 Or Beauty (pogtpn?). 

23 Cf. The Gospel of Maty in the Akhmim Codex: “He nodded, and when He had thus nodded assent . . . .” ( F . F. F., 
586). 

24 The Eighth Sphere bounding the Seven. 

25 For note on E^ouoia, see R. in loc. and 48, n. 3. 


- 6 - 



Brother’s creatures 26 . They fell in love with him, and gave 
him each a share of his own ordering 27 . 

And after that he had well-learned their essence and had 
become a sharer in their nature, he had a mind to break 
right through the Boundary of their spheres, and to 
subdue 28 the might of that which pressed upon the Fire 29 . 

14. So he who hath the whole authority o’er [all] the 
mortals in the cosmos and o’er its lives irrational, bent his 
face downwards through’ 11 the Harmony 31 , breaking right 
through its strength, and showed to downward Nature 
God’s fair Form. 

And when she saw that Form of beauty which can never 
satiate, and him who [now] possessed within himself each 
single energy of [all seven] Rulers as well as God’s [own] 
Form, she smiled with love; for ’twas as though she’d seen 
the image of Man’s fairest form upon her Water, his 
shadow on her Earth. 

He in his turn beholding the form like to himself, existing 
in her, in her Water, loved it and willed to live in it; and 
with the will came act’ 2 , and [so] he vivified the form 
devoid of reason. 

And Nature took the object of her love and wound herself 
completely round him, and they were intermingled, for 
they were lovers. 

15. And this is why beyond all creatures on the earth man 
is twofold; mortal because of body, but because of the 
essential Man immortal. 

Though deathless and possessed of sway o’er all, yet doth 
he suffer as a mortal doth, subject to Fate. 


26 That is the Seven Spheres fashioned by his Brother. 

27 xdfiq, rank or order. 

28 Or “wear down” (xaxocTtovfjoai). The reading xaxavofjoai, however, may be more correct; “he had a mind to come 
to knowledge of’ this Boundary or Ring Pass not. See R. 49, n. 1. 

29 Sc. the Mighty Power of § 9. 

30 TiagsxutJjsv. Cf. Cyril, C.J., i. 33 (Frag, xiii.); R. 50: “beugt sich . . . niedet ’’ But compare especially Plato, Phadnis , 249 
C., where he speaks of the soul “raising up her face (Clvaxutjiaaa) to That which is.” Cf. also Apion in Clement. Horn., 
vi. 4, in Comment. C. H., xi. (xii.) 

31 That is, the harmonious interplay, concord or system of the spheres ruled by the Rulers; in other words, the 
cosmos of Fate. 

32 SveQyeia, energy, and realization. 


-7 - 



Thus though above the Harmony, within the Harmony he 
hath become a slave. Though male-female 11 , as from a 
Father male-female, and though he’s sleepless from a 
sleepless [Sire], yet is he overcome [by sleep]. 

16. Thereon [I say: Teach on] 14 , O Mind of me, for I 
myself as well 35 am amorous of the Word (Logos). 

The Shepherd said: This is the mystery kept hid until this 
day. Nature embraced by Man brought forth a wonder, oh 
so wonderful. For as he had the nature of the Concord 16 
of the Seven, who, as I said to thee, [were made] of Fire 
and Spirit 17 - Nature delayed not, but immediately brought 
forth seven “men,” in correspondence with the natures of 
the Seven, male-female and moving in the air 18 . 

Thereon [I said]: O Shepherd, . , 39 . . . ; for now I’m filled 
with great desire and long to hear; do not run off 40 . 

The Shepherd said: Keep silence, for not as yet have I 
unrolled for thee the first discourse (logos). 

Lo! I am still, I said. 

17. In such wise then, as I have said, the generation of 
these seven came to pass. Earth was as woman, her Water 
filled with longing; ripeness she took from Fire, spirit 
from dither. Nature thus brought forth frames to suit the 
form of Man. 

And Man from Life and Light changed into soul and 
mind, - from Life to soul, from Light to mind. 

And thus continued all the sense-world’s parts 41 until the 
period of their end and new beginnings. 

18. Now listen to the rest of the discourse (logos) which 
thou dost long to hear. 


33 That is “a-sexual” but having the potentiality of both sexes. 

34 For the various suggestions for filling up this lacuna, see R. in loc.\ and for that of Keil, see R. 367. 

35 Sc. as well as Nature. 

36 Harmony. 

37 See § 9. 

38 petagoloug. A term that must have a more definite meaning than the vague “sublime” by which it is generally 
translated. 

39 For Keil’s completion of the lacuna, see R. 368. 

40 pH perhaps meaning diverge from the subject, or go too fast; lit., it means “do not run away.” 

41 That is, the parts of what Hermes elsewhere calls the “cosmic man.” 


- 8 - 



The period being ended, the bond that bound them all 
was loosened by God’s Will. For all the animals being 
male-female, at the same time with man were loosed apart; 
some became partly male, some in like fashion [partly] 
female. And straightway God spake by His Holy Word 
(Logos): 

“Increase ye in increasing, and multiply in multitude, ye 
creatures and creations all; and man that hath Mind in 
him, let him learn to know that he himself is deathless, 
and that the cause of death is love 42 , though Love is all 4 ’.” 

19. When He said this, His Forethought 44 did by means of 
Fate and Harmony effect their couplings and their 
generations founded. And so all things were multiplied 
according to their kind. 

And he who thus hath learned to know himself, hath 
reached that Good which doth transcend abundance; but 
he who through a love that leads astray, expends his love 
upon his body, - he stays in Darkness wandering 4 ’, and 
suffering through his senses things of Death. 

20. What is the so great fault, said I, the ignorant commit, 
that they should be deprived of deathlessness? 

Thou seem’st, he said, O thou, not to have given heed to 
what thou heardest. Did not I bid thee think? 

Yea do I think, and I remember, and therefore give Thee 
thanks. 

If thou didst think [thereon], [said He], tell me: Why do 
they merit death who are in Death? 

It is because the gloomy Darkness is the root and base of 
the material frame; from it 46 came the Moist Nature; from 
this 47 the body in the sense-world was composed; and 
from this [body] Death doth the Water drain. 


42 Cf. C. H, xvi. 16. 

43 Omitting the id before Ovtol 

44 tigovoia, that is Nature as Sophia or Providence or Will. 

45 There is a word-play between tiXavt]? and TtXavwpsvo?. 

46 Sc. Darkness. 

47 Sc The Moist Nature. 


- 9 - 



21. Right was thy thought, O thou! But how doth “he 
who knows himself, go unto Him,” as God’s Word 
(Logos) hath declared? 

And I reply: the Father of the universals doth consist of 
Light and Life, and from Him Man was born. 

Thou sayest well, [thus] speaking. Light and Life is Father- 
God, and from Him Man was born. 

If then thou learnest that thou art thyself of Life and 
Light, and that thou [only] happen’st to be out of them, 
thou shalt return again to Life. Thus did Man-Shepherd 
speak. 

But tell me further, Mind of me, I cried, how shall I come 
to Life again .... for God doth say: “The man who hath 
Mind in him, let him learn to know that he himself [is 
deathless].” 

22. Have not all men then Mind? 

Thou sayest well, O thou, thus speaking. I, Mind, myself 
am present with holy men and good, the pure and 
merciful, men who live piously. 

[To such] my presence doth become an aid, and 
straightway they gain gnosis of all things, and win the 
Father’s love by their pure lives, and give Him thanks, 
invoking on Him blessings, and chanting hymns, intent on 
Him with ardent love. 

And ere they give the body up unto its proper death, they 
turn them with disgust from its sensations, from 
knowledge of what things they operate 48 . Nay, it is I, the 
Mind, that will not let the operations which befall the 
body, work to their [natural] end. For being door-keeper 
I’ll close up [all] the entrances, and cut the mental actions 
off which base and evil energies induce. 

23. But to the Mind-less ones, the wicked and depraved, 
the envious and covetous, and those who murder do and 
love impiety, I am far off, yielding my place to the 
Avenging Daimon, who sharpening the fire, tormenteth 


48 slSoxs? aUxGOv id 


- 10 - 



him and addeth fire to fire upon him, and rusheth on him 
through his senses, thus rendering him the readier for 
transgressions of the law, so that he meets with greater 
torment; nor doth he ever cease to have desire for 
appetites inordinate, insatiately striving in the dark 49 . 

24. Well hast thou taught me all, as I desired, O Mind. 
And now, pray, tell me further of the nature of the Way 
Above as now it is [for me] 50 . 

To this Man-Shepherd said: When thy material body is to 
be dissolved, first thou surrenderest the body by itself 
unto the work of change, and thus the form thou hadst 
doth vanish, and thou surrenderest thy way of life 51 , void 
of its energy, unto the Daimon’ 2 . The body’s senses next 
pass back into their sources, becoming separate, and 
resurrect as energies; and passion and desire 3 ’ withdraw 
unto that nature which is void of reason. 

25. And thus it is that man doth speed his way thereafter 
upwards through the Harmony. To the first zone he gives 
the Energy of Growth and Waning; unto the second 
[zone], Device of Evils [now] de-energized’ 4 ; unto the 
third, the Guile of the Desires de-energized; unto the 
fourth, his Domineering Arrogance, [also] de-energized; 
unto the fifth, unholy Daring and the Rashness of 
Audacity, de-energized; unto the sixth, Striving for Wealth 
by evil means, deprived of its aggrandisement; and to the 
seventh zone, Ensnaring Falsehood, de-energized”. 

26. And then, with all the energizings of the Harmony 
stript from him, clothed in his proper Power, he cometh 
to that Nature which belongs unto the Eighth’ 6 , and there 
with those-that-are hymneth the Father. 


49 The text of this paragraph is hopelessly confused in the MSS. 

50 tisqI if]? CIvoSou xfj? Y lvo ( Jl -s vy l?- 

51 i0 r)0og, the “habitual” part of man, presumably way of life impressed by habit on the body; or it may be “class” of 
life as in the Vision of Er. 

52 Cf.C.H., x. (xi.) 16. 

53 0 0upOg Mai r| £7u0ufj.ia, - the masculine and feminine as positive and negative aspects of the “animal soul.” 

54 avevsgyrpov. 

55 Cf.C.H., xiii. (xiv.) 7. 

56 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 15. 


- 11 - 



They who are there welcome his coming there with joy; 
and he, made like to them that sojourn there, doth further 
hear the Powers who are above the Nature that belongs 
unto the Eighth, singing their songs of praise to God in 
language of their own. 

And then they, in a band 07 , go to the Father home; of their 
own selves they make surrender of themselves to Powers, 
and [thus] becoming Powers they are in God. This the 
good end for those who have gained Gnosis - to be made 
one with God. 

Why shouldst thou then delay? Must it not be, since thou 
hast all received, that thou shouldst to the worthy point 
the way, in order that through thee the race of mortal kind 
may by [thy] God be saved? 

27. This when He’d said, Man-Shepherd mingled with the 
Powers' 8 . 

But I, with thanks and blessings unto the Father of the 
universal [Powers], was freed, full of the power He had 
poured into me, and full of what He’d taught me of the 
nature of the All and of the loftiest Vision. 

And I began to preach to men the Beauty of Devotion 
and of Gnosis: 

O ye people, earth-born folk, ye who have given 
yourselves to drunkenness and sleep and ignorance of 
God, be sober now, cease from your surfeit, cease to be 
glamoured by irrational sleep! 09 

28. And when they heard, they came with one accord. 
Whereon I say: 

Ye earth-born folk, why have ye given up yourselves to 
Death, while yet ye have the power of sharing 
Deathlessness? Repent, O ye, who walk with Error arm in 
arm and make of Ignorance the sharer of your board; get 


57 xdfsi, order, group, sc. of the Nine; - the Father being the Ten, or consummation. 

58 Cf. K. K, 25: “Thus speaking God became Imperishable Mind.” 

59 Cf. the logos, “Jesus saith, I stood in the midst of the world, and in the flesh was I seen of them, and I found all 
men drunken, and none found I athirst among them, and my soul grieveth over the sons of men, because they are 
blind in heart.” Sayings of Our Lord from an Early Greek Papyrus, Grenfell & Hunt (London; 1897). 


- 12 - 



ye from out the light of Darkness, and take your part in 
Deathlessness, forsake Destruction! 

29. And some of them with jests upon their lips 61 ’ departed 
[from me], abandoning themselves unto the Way of 
Death; others entreated to be taught, casting themselves 
before my feet. 

But I made them arise, and I became a leader of the 
Race 61 towards home, teaching the words (logoi), how and 
in what way they shall be saved. I sowed in them the 
words (logoi) of wisdom 62 ; of Deathless Water were they 
given to drink 6 ’ 1 . 

And when even was come and all sun’s beams began to 
set, I bade them all give thanks to God. And when they 
had brought to an end the giving of their thanks, each 
man returned to his own resting place. 

30. But I recorded in my heart Man-Shepherd’s 
benefaction, and with my every hope fulfilled more than 
rejoiced. For body’s sleep became the soul’s awakening 64 , 
and closing of the eyes - true vision, pregnant with Good 
my silence, and the utterance of my word (logos) 
begetting of good things. 

All this befell me from my Mind, that is Man-Shepherd, 
Word (Logos) of all masterhood 6 ’ 3 , by whom being God- 
inspired I came unto the Plain of Truth 66 . Wherefore with 
all my soul and strength thanksgiving 67 give I unto Father- 
God. 

31. Floly art Thou, O God, the universals’ Father. 

Holy art Thou, O God, whose Will perfects itself by 
means of its own Powers. 


60 Cf. P. S. A., xii. 2. 

61 The Race of the Logos, of all who were conscious of the Logos in their hearts, who had repented and were thus 
logoi. 

62 Cf. Mark iv. 4: “He who soweth soweth the Word (Logos)” 

63 Cf. K. K., 1 - the drink given by Isis to Horns. 

64 vfjt]ng, lit. soberness, watchfulness, lucidity. 

65 See § 2 above. 

66 Cf. K. K. (Stob., Ec., i. 49; p. 459, 20, W.), and Damascius, in Phot., Bibl., p. 337b, 23. 

67 sUkoyiav, - a play on Xoyoq. 


- 13 - 



Holy art Thou, O God, who willeth to be known and art 
known by Thine own. 

Holy art Thou, who didst by Word (Logos) make to 
consist the things that are. 

Holy art Thou, of whom All-nature hath been made an 
Image. 

Holy art Thou, whose Form Nature hath never made. 

Holy art Thou, more powerful than all power. 

Holy art Thou, transcending all pre-eminence. 

Holy Thou art, Thou better than all praise. 

Accept my reason’s 68 offerings pure, from soul and heart 
for aye stretched up to Thee, O Thou unutterable, 
unspeakable, Whose Name naught but the Silence can 
express. 

32. Give ear to me who pray that I may ne’er of Gnosis 
fail, [Gnosis] which is our common Being’s nature 69 ; and 
fill me with Thy Power, and with this Grace [of Thine], 
that I may give the Light to those in ignorance of the 
Race, my Brethren, and Thy Sons. 

For this cause I believe, and I bear witness; I go to Life 
and Light. Blessed art Thou, O Father. Thy Man 7 " would 
holy be as Thou art holy, e’en as Thou gavest him Thy full 
authority 71 [to be]. 



68 XoyiKaq. 

69 tH? yvwaew? x(F xax oUaiav H[J.cbv, “our being,” that is, presumably, the “being” of man and God, the “being” 
which man shares with God. 

70 Cf.C.H., xiii. (xiv.) 20. 

71 E^ouoiav. 


- 14 - 



COMMENTARY 


OF VISION AND APOCALYPSIS 

The “Poemandres” treatise not only belongs to the most important type of the 
Trismegistic literature, but is also the most important document within that type. It 
constitutes, so to speak, the Ground-Gospel of the Poemandres Communities, in 
the form of a revelation or apocalypse received by the founder of the tradition, that 
founder, however, being not a historical personage but the personification of a 
teaching-power or grade of spiritual illumination - in other words, of one who had 
reached the “Hermes,” or rather “Thrice-greatest,” state of consciousness or 
enlightenment. 

This stage of enlightenment was characterized by a heightening of the spiritual 
intuition which made the mystic capable of receiving the first touch of cosmic 
consciousness, and of retaining it in his physical memory when he returned to the 
normal state. 

The setting forth of the teaching is thus naturally in the form of apocalyptic, and 
of apocalyptic of an ordered and logical nature; for it purports to be a setting forth 
of the spiritual “Epopteia” of the Inner Mysteries, the Vision revealed by the Great 
Initiator or Master-Hierophant, Mind of all-masterhood. 

This Vision, as we are told by many seers and prophets of the time, was 
incapable of being set forth by “tongue of flesh” in its own proper terms, seeing 
that it transcended the consciousness of normal humanity. Being in itself a living, 
potent, intelligible reality, apart from all forms either material or intellectual in any 
way known to man, it pervaded his very being and made his whole nature respond 
to a new key of truth, or rather, vibrate in a higher octave, so to say, where all 
things, while remaining the same, received a new interpretation and intensity. 

The interpretation of this Vision, however, was conditioned by the “matter” of 
each seer; he it was who had to clothe the naked beauty of the Truth - as the 
Gnostic Marcus would have phrased it - with the fairest garment he himself 
possessed, the highest thoughts, the best science, the fairest traditions, the most 
grandiose imagination known to him. Thus it is that we have so many modes of 
expression among the mystics of the time, so many varieties of spiritual experience 
- not because the experience itself was “other,” the experience was the “same” for 
all, but the speaking of it forth was conditioned by the religious and philosophical 
and scientific heredity of the seer. 

This element, then, is the basic fact in all such apocalyptic. It is, however, seldom 
that we meet with a document that has come to us straight from the hand of a seer 
writing down his own immediate experience without admixture; for the delight of 
the Vision was not that it gave new facts or ideas of the same nature as those 
already in circulation, but that it threw light on existing traditions, and showed 
them forth as being parts of a whole. Once the man had come into touch with the 
Great Synthesis, there rushed into his mind innumerable passages of scripture, 
scraps of myths, fragments of cosmogenesis, logoi and logia, and symbols of all 
kinds that fitted naturally. These were not any special writer’s monopoly, there was 


- 15 - 



no copyright in them, they were all utterances of the same Logos, the Great 
Instructor of humanity. 

Thus the literature that was produced was anonymous or pseudepigraphic. There 
was first of all a nucleus of personal vision and direct illumination, then a grouping 
of similar matter from various sources into a whole for didactic purposes. Nor was 
there any idea among these mystics and scripture -writers that the form once issued 
should become for ever stereotyped as inerrant; there were many recensions and 
additions and interpolations. It was left to those without the sense of illumination 
to stereotype the forms and claim for them the inerrancy of verbal dictation by the 
Deity. Those who wrote the apocalypses from personal knowledge of vision could 
not make such claim for their scriptures, for they knew how they were written, and 
what was the nature of hearing and sight. 

We have accordingly to treat all such documents as natural human compositions, 
but while doing so, while on the one side analyzing them with microscopic 
attention as literary compositions, put together from other sources, over-written, 
redacted and interpolated, we have also, on the other, to bear in mind that this was 
not done by clever manipulators and literary charlatans, but by men who regarded 
such work as a holy and spiritual task, who endeavoured to arrange all under the 
inspiration of a sweet influence for good, who believed themselves under guidance 
in their selection of matter, and in recombining the best in other scriptures into a 
new whole that might prove still better for the purpose of further enlightenment 
suitable to their immediate environment. 

The “Poemandres” treatise is of this nature - that is to say, though we have not 
the original form before us, we have what was intended to be read as a single 
document. We shall accordingly endeavour in our comments not to allow the 
anomalies of its outer form to detract from our appreciation of its inner spirit, and 
yet, on the otirer hand, not to permit the beauty of much that is in it to blind us to 
the fact that the present form has evolved from simpler beginnings. 

THE GREAT AND LITTLE MAN 

1 . In deep meditation the disciple reaches the consummation of his efforts, and 
receives initiation from the Master of the masters, who is to confer upon him 
authority (s^ooalocv - see § 32) to teach, that is, to be a master or a Hermes. 

2. That this Grand Master of the Inner Mysteries was Man and Shepherd of 
men, the Very Self of men, has been amply shown in the Prolegomena, but the 
striking parallelism with the very wording of our text, the Great Man, the “Being 
more than vast,” who tells the litde man, that though for the first time he now 
knows Iris Greater Self, that Self has ever been “everywhere with thee,” is best 
shown by tire beautiful logos from the Gospel of Eve (presumably an Egyptian gospel), 
which we have already quoted elsewhere 72 : 

“1 stood on a lofty mountain 7 i , and saw a gigantic Man and another, a dwaf; and 
I heard, as it were, a voice of thunder, and drew nigh for to hear; and He spake unto 


72 From Epiphanius, Hares., xxvi. 3; see note to the first Hermes-Prayer (i. 11). 

73 Symbolical of a high state of consciousness, the Mount of Perfection. 


- 16 - 



me and said: I am thou, and thou art I; and wheresoever thou mayest be, I am 
there 74 . In all am I scattered, and whencesoever thou wiliest, thou gatherest Me; and 
gathering Me, thou gatherest Thyself.” 

THE PRESENCE 

3. The conditions of the seeing of the Holy Sight had been fulfilled by the 
disciple; he had weaned himself from all lower desires. No longer, like the theurgist 
in the Hermes-invocations of the popular cult, does he pray for wealth and fame 
and cheerful countenance, and the rest; his one desire, his only will, is now to 
“learn the things that are, and comprehend their nature and know God.” He craves 
for Gnosis, - Gnosis of Cosmos and its mysteries, Gnosis of Nature, the Great 
Mother, and, finally, Gnosis of God, the Father of the worlds. This is the one 
question he “holds in his mind,” his whole nature is concentrated into this one 
point of interrogation. 

It is to be noticed that we are not told, as in the Gospel of Eve, that the seer stood, 
as it were, apart from himself, and saw his little self and Greater Self 
simultaneously. He is conscious of a Presence, of a Persona in the highest 
theological meaning of the word, who is not seen so much as felt, speaking to him 
Mind to mind; he hears this Presence rather than sees it. 

THE VISION OF CREATION 

4. The first part of his mental question is: How came this cosmos into being? 
The answer is the changing of the Boundless Presence into “Light, sweet joyous 
Light.” He loses all sight of “all things” in his mind, the mental image he had 
formed of cosmos, and is plunged into the infinitude of Limitless Light and Joy, 
which transports him out of himself in highest ecstasy. 

But he has craved for Gnosis, not Joy and Light, but Wisdom, the understanding 
and reconciliation of the great Opposites, the Cross of all Manifestation. 

Therefore must he know the Mystery of Ignorance as well as that of Knowledge. 
Within the Infinitude of Light appears the Shadow of the Unknown, which 
translates itself to his consciousness as Darkness, - the Shadow of the Thrice- 
unknown Darkness, which, as Damascius tells us 75 , was the First Principle of the 
Egyptians, the Ineffable Mystery, of which they “said nothing,” and of which our 
author says nothing. 

This Darkness comes forth from within outwards to the disciple’s 
consciousness, it spreads “downwards” in sinuous folds like a Great Snake, 
symbolizing, presumably, the unknown, and to him unknowable, mysteries of the 
differentiation of the root of matter of the cosmos that was to be; its motion was 
spiral, sinuous, unending vibrations, not yet confined into a sphere; not yet ordered, 
but chaotic, in unceasing turmoil, a terrible contrast to the sweet peace of the Light, 
gradually changing from Dark Space or Spirit into a Fluid or Flowing Matter, or 


74 Cf. the Oxyrhynchus logion 5: “Jesus saith: Wherever there are [two], they are not without God, and wherever there 
is one alone, I say, I am with him.” 

75 See note to the fifth Hermes-Prayer (v. 2). 


- 17 - 



Moist Nature; that is, presumably, what the Greek mystics would have called Rhea, 
the Primal Mother or Matter of the future universe. 

It wails and groans - that is, its motion is as yet unharmonized. In the 
terminology of the Sophia-mythus, it is the inchoate birth from the Sophia Above, 
in the Fullness, brought forth by herself alone, without her syzygy or consort. On 
account of its imperfection she wails and groans to the Father of All and His 
Perfections, that her Perfection may be sent to fashion her child, who is herself in 
manifestation, into a world of order, and eventually into a Perfection in its turn' 6 . 

The Primal Undifferentiated or Chaotic Sound, from the Darkness of its first 
state, gradually manifests itself under the brooding power of the Boundless Light, 
into less confused thunderings and murmurings, and finally reaches a stage 
symbolized by a “Cry,” a “Voice of Fire,” of Fire, not Light, expressing a need and 
want, longing for union with the Articulate Power or Cosmic Word. 

The three most primal stages thus seem to be symbolized by Darkness, Moist 
Essence, Fire. These were not our differentiated elements, but the Primal Pre- 
cosmic Elements. 

The same idea, though in different forms, is met with in a system of the Gnosis 
preserved for us by the Old Latin translator of Irenasus 77 , and also by Theodoret 78 , 
who ascribes it to the Sethians, whom he says are also called Ophianas or Ophite. 
Now Seth was Typhon or Darkness, Dark Light, and this Seth may very well have 
been symbolized as the Great Serpent of Darkness, as it is in our text; hence the 
name “Those of the Serpent,” perhaps given them by their theological adversaries 
(orthodox Jews and Christians). In this system the Primal Elements are given as 
Water, Darkness, Abyss, and Chaos. The Light was the Child of the supreme 
Trinity - the First Man, the Second Man, and the Holy Spirit or First Woman. This 
Light the Jewish and Christian over-working of the original tradition called the 
Cosmic Christ. 

Thus the Fire of Desire, or Cry of the Darkness, was to be satisfied or checked 
or quenched by the Light’s fashioning its inchoate substance into the cosmos; and 
so in another Vision, preserved in a treatise of the same type, Hermes sees, by 
gazing “through the Master,” the cosmos in its finished beauty, when all things in it 
are full of Dght and nowhere is there Fire 79 . 

THE DESCENT OF THE LOGOS 

5. Upon this Cry for Light, into the Heart of the Dark-Moist-Fiery-Nature is 
dropped a Holy Word, the Seed of the future Cosmos. This Word is Articulate (its 
Limbs are perfect), Seasonable and Ordering. The Cosmic Animal Nature is 
impregnated with the Light of the Supernal Reason, which pervades its whole 
being. 

This pervading immediately effects an ordering of the Chaotic Elements into 
Pure Fire, Pure Air, and Pure Water-Earth. Moreover, it is to be gathered from the 


76 Cf. F. F. F, 340, 341. 

77 Har., I. xxx. (Stieren, i. 363 ff.). 

78 Har., Fabb., i. 14. See F. F. F., pp. 188 ff. 

79 “The Mind to Hermes,” C. H., xi. (xii.) 6, 7. 


- 18 - 



sequel that Nature saw the Word and all his Beauty in her Fire and Air, but as yet 
only heard him in her Water-Earth. 

6. The Shepherd thus explains that Light*" is really Mind, and Mind is God, - 
God prior to Nature, but not prior to Darkness. The Unity of Light and Darkness 
is a still higher Mystery. Light and Mind is the highest concept the disciple can yet 
form of God. The Light-Word, or emanation of Supernal Reason, is Son of God, 
Son of Great Mind. 


THE REVELATION OF THE PLEROMA 

With the words “What then?” Reitzenstein (p. 37) perceives that the sequence of 
the narrative is broken by a second vision, and is only resumed with § 9. This he 
regards as an interpolation of another form of cosmogenesis, into the one which is 
being described. 

It seems to me, however, that the breaking of the main narrative may be 
regarded as a necessary digression rather than as an interpolation of foreign 
material - necessary in order to bring on to the scene the hitherto invisible 
Greatnesses, “within” the Veil of Light, which constitute the Economy of the 
Pleroma. More had to be seen by the disciple before he was in a position to 
understand what he had so far seen. He must now unite with the Light, his 
previous seeing being that of its reflection, the logos within him. Not that this 
logos and Light (or Mind) are separate. They are in reality one, the Son is one with 
the Father in the state that transcends the opposites. The Logos apparently comes 
forth, yet it remains ever with the Father, and this coming forth and yet remaining 
constitutes its Life - in other words, it is an emanation. Thus Hermes is bidden to 
understand the Light as Life, and so make friends with it. 

7. Hitherto the Light had been one for him a sameness which his highest vision 
could not pierce, the Veil of Light that shut the Beauties, Perfections and 
Greatnesses of the Intelligible from the eyes of his mind. To pierce this veil a still 
more expanded power of sight had to be given him by the Master. The little word 
or light-spark within him is intensified by the Great Word of the Master, this Word 
being an Intelligible Utterance of the Mind, an intensification of being. 

He now sees and understands the countless Powers within the Light, which 
constitute the Intelligible Archetypal Form or Idea of all worlds. Between the 
special sensible cosmos of his prior vision and this Immensity was a Mighty Power, 
or Great Boundary (Horos) 81 , that encircled the elements of the sensible cosmos 
and held its Fire in check. 

8. In amazement he asks whence come these apparently disorderly and untamed 
elements of the new world in process that have to be subdued and separated from 
the Concord of the Perfection of the Powers? And the answer is that Chaos, too, 
has its being from God’s Will. Discord and Concord, Chaos and Cosmos, are both 
of God. The Primal Elements are, as it were, the Passions of God’s Will desiring 
Himself. It is Himself as Mother or Spouse desiring Himself as Father. In other of 


80 That is, the condition “seeing.” 

81 Not Horns. 


- 19 - 



the Trismegistic tractates 82 this “Feminine Aspect” of Deity is called Wisdom and 
Nature and Generation and Isis. He is Wisdom as desiring Himself, - that Desire 
being the Primal Cause as Mother of the whole world-process, which is 
consummated by His Fullness uniting with His Desire or Wisdom, and so 
perfecting it. 

This is the whole burden of the Gnostic Sophia-mythus, which I have given very 
good reasons for believing derived its main element from Egypt 8 ’. Curiously 
enough, Reitzenstein (pp. 39, 40) quotes the two chapters (liii. and liv.) from 
Plutarch on which I base my conclusions, but he does not notice that in this 
respect the Christianized Gnosis is distinctly dependent on Egypt. 

And so Philo 84 also tells us that the Mother of All is Gnosis (£7uaxf][xr]), the very 
same name that Plutarch gives to Isis. 

The Mother, when thought of as without the Pleroma, is impregnated by the 
Word, which Basilides would have called the All-seed Potency of the Pleroma, 
endowed with all Powers, and sent forth as the seed of the sensible cosmos that is 
to be. The Mother in her higher Nature contemplates the Eternal Cosmos or Order 
of the Pleroma, and in her lower Nature copies its Beauties by means of the 
permutations and combinations of her elements and the generations and 
transformations of her lives or souls. 

This form of cosmogenesis Reitzenstein (p. 46) regards as of a pantheistic 
nature, while the general narrative he holds to set forth a world-representation of a 
dualistic tendency. It is true, as he himself admits, that this blend of contradictory 
conceptions meets us frequently in Gnostic systems of a more or less 
contemporary date; nevertheless he lays great stress upon this difference, and so 
insists upon an interpolation. 

In this he is confirmed (p. 39) by the fact that whereas § 9 speaks of God the 
Mind being male-female, we are in the second vision face to face with “eine iveibliche 
A-llgottheif who stands next to the Highest God. 

I must, however, confess that these contradictions do not make so great an 
impression upon my mind as they seem to have done on the critical faculty of 
Professor Reitzenstein. There is no system known to me, even of the most 
exclusive monotheism, into which dualism does not creep somehow or other at 
some stage; it cannot be avoided, for it is in the nature of things. 

The dualism of our text is, however, by no means so very marked, for though it 
is not distinctly stated in § 4, it leaves it clearly to be inferred that the Darkness 
comes from the Light itself, for previously there was nothing but Light; “all tilings” 
had become Light to the eye of the seer. It is the mystery of the sad-eyed Serpent 
of Darkness wrapping itself round the lower limbs of the Light. 

It was, in my opinion, precisely for the sake of removing the thought of dualism 
that the seer is shown a still more intimate vision within the Light Veil, where all 
ideas of monotheism, dualism, tritheism, polytheism, and pantheism lose their 
formal distinctions in a Formless State, or, at any rate, in a State of Being where all 


82 For references, see R. 39, n. 1; also 44. 

83 Cf. my note on Plut., De Is. et Os., liv. 6, in the Prolegg. 

84 De Ebriet., § 30. 


- 20 - 



are interblended with all. In describing it, the “tongue of flesh” has to use the 
familiar language of form, but every word employed has a new significance; for 
even the “tongue of angels” cannot describe it, or any of the “tongues” of heaven; 
He alone who speaks forth the Words of the One Tongue can express it. 

Whence this sublime conception of the Pleroma came, I do not know; it seems 
to me impossible to find a geographical origin for such tilings, as, indeed, it seems 
vain to seek a geographical origin for dualism and the rest. For the writer or writers 
of our tractate these ideas came from the nature of tilings, from the immediate 
experience of sight. 

The form of expression, of course, may be susceptible of a geographical 
treatment, but as yet I am not satisfied that any clear heredity has been made out 
for this supposed interpolation. The Feminine Divinity, next the Highest God, is 
not set over against that God, but is His own Will. He is in the Pleroma Vision as 
much and as little male and female as in the general narrative. He transcends all 
opposites and contains all opposites in Himself. 

What is clear, however, is that in the combination of both visions we have 
before us a simple and early form of the Gnosis which we meet with later in 
Christian over- workings, and especially in the very elaborate expositions of the 
Basilidian and Valentinian schools, the systems of which can, in their main 
elements, be paralleled and compared point by point with our treatise; but this 
would be too lengthy a proceeding in our present study, for it would require a 
volume to itself in any way adequately to treat of it 85 . 

THE SECOND EMANATION 

9. We now return to the main narrative. Within the World-Egg, which was 
encircled by the Mighty Power (the Gnostic Horos), there had already been 
developed three Cosmic Elements (not our mixed elements) - Fire, Air, and Water- 
Earth. This had been effected by the descent of the Cosmic Logos into the Primal 
Elements of Disorder. As the Logos descended, Fire and Air ascended, and the 
Logos remained in Water-Earth, if his was the result of the First Outpouring from 
the Potency of the Pleroma, the First Word uttered by Mind. 

The Second Outpouring of Mind was of Mind no longer regarded as Light only, 
but as Light and Life, Male-Female. This emanation appeared as Enforming Mind - 
that is, the Fashioner or Former, Artificer or Demiurge of lives or souls; it was the 
ensouling of the Ordered Elements of Nature with lives, whereby these Elements 
were drawn together into forms. 

The Great Mind, as Light and Life, reflected itself in the “pure formation” of 
Nature - that is to say, in Fire and Spirit (Air), Fire for Light and Spirit for Life, to 
further enform things. 

The Mighty Power or Self-limitation of Mind, the Boundary that no mortal can 
pass, marks off the formative area of the whole cosmos. This area, however, was by 
no means only the mixed sensible world (cosmos) which we perceive with our 


85 The reader, however, may be referred to the chapters on “The Basilidian Gnosis,” “The Valentinian Movement,” 
“Some Outlines of iEonology,” and “The Sophia-Mythus,” in F. F. F, pp. 253-357. 


-21 - 



present physical senses. On the contrary, there are within it various orders (cosmoi) 
of the main cosmos. For the Ordering Mind, as the Enformer or Soul-fashioner, 
differentiates itself into seven Ruling Forms or Spheres which “enclose” the mixed 
sensible cosmos; these spheres, therefore, must be of a psychic nature - that is to 
say, of a pure or subde substance; they are Forms of subtle matter endowed with 
reason. They constitute the Cosmic Engine of the fashioning of souls, or psychic 
natures, and of their perpetual transforming. Their energies and activities are those 
of Fate, or the ordered sequence of cause and effect, symbolized by spheres 
perpetually entering into themselves. 

10. In all the main phases there is to be observed the idea of a downward 
tendency followed by an upward. The Darkness descends; it then transmutes itself 
and aspires above in a Cry or Yearning for Light. The Word descends; immediately 
the Fire and Air ascend. The Formative Mind descends; immediately the Word 
ascends from the mixed Water-Earth - and at-ones itself widi its co-essential 
emanation from the Father - to a space about the Seven, and thus leaves the still 
down-tending elements in the Element Water-Earth deprived of its immediate 
presence, after giving physical matter the initial impulse to order. This physical 
matter our author calls “pure matter,” meaning thereby matter deprived of the 
immediate presence of Reason. 

11. Hereupon from the impulse she has received Nature begins her physical 
enformation, develops her physical elements and bodies of irrational lives. Water- 
Earth divides into water and earth, and also air, for this air is clearly something 
different from the Spirit- Air that ascended; the lower air is one of the downward 
elements. 


THE DESCENT OF MAN 

12. When this had been accomplished, there followed a Third Outpouring - the 
descent of Man, the consummation of the whole Enformation of things, a still 
more transcendent manifestation of Mind, the One Form that contains all forms, 
His Very Image coequal with Himself. He finally comes Himself to consummate 
and save the cosmos in the Form of Man - that is, to gather it to Himself and take 
it back into the Pleroma. 

Nevertheless the Word and the Formative Mind and Man are not three different 
Persons; they are all co-essential with each other and one with the Father. For the 
Word is co-essential with the Demiurgic Mind (§ 10), and the latter is Brother of 
Man (§ 13), and Man is co-equal with God (§ 12). 

13. And so Man, the Beloved, descends; and in Inis descent he is clothed with all 
the powers of his Brother’s creative energy, the creative energy of Life conjoined 
with rational Light. 

Having learned the lesson of the conformations and of the limitations of the 
Spheres, he desires to break right through the Great Boundary itself; but to do this 


- 22 - 



he must descend still further into matter. Before he can burst through upwards he 
must break through downwards. 

14. Accordingly he breaks through the Spheres downwards, seeking his consort 
Nature below, and shows her his Divine Form radiant with all the energies 
bestowed on him by all the Powers above. 

And she in her great love wound herself round the image of this Form mirrored 
upon her water, and the shadow of it thrown upon her earth; just as the Darkness 
wound itself, like a Great Serpent, round the lower parts of the Light, so does 
Nature coil herself round the shadow and reflection of Man. Man is above, yet is he 
below; man is free, yet is he bound - bound willingly in love for her who is himself. 

Reitzenstein (pp. 47-49) is greatly puzzled with all this, and seeks to distinguish 
several contradictory elements, presumably supposing that these elements are 
woven together into a literary patchwork from distinct traditions. I cannot myself 
follow him here with any clearness. Of course the writer or writers of our treatise 
did not discover new ideas or invent new terms; they used what was in their minds 
and the minds of their circle. It was, however, the weaving of it into a whole, not as 
a literary exercise, but as a setting forth in the most understandable terms with 
which they were acquainted of the “things seen,” that was their main interest. 
Those who had the “sight” would understand and appreciate their labours, those 
who had not would never understand, no matter what terms or what language were 
used. 

When, then, Reitzenstein (p. 47) says that in § 11, in the bringing forth by Nature 
of irrational lives, there is a confusion of contradictory conceptions, he fails to see 
that Nature is ever the World-Soul, the spouse of Mind; though Darkness she is 
spouse of Light. Unaided she brings forth things irrational, a phase of that birth of 
Nature by herself that is incomplete. 

So also in § 13, Reitzenstein detects contradictory elements, which he ascribes to 
two different regions of ideas. He does not, however, perceive that though in one 
sentence the “formations” are said to be those of the Father, and in the next those 
of the Brother, this is no real confusion, because the Formative Mind is the Father, 
enforming Himself in Himself; this self-energizing, when regarded by itself, may be 
spoken of as other than the Father, but is not really so. 

Nor can I see that there is any real contradiction in the breaking through of the 
Spheres as though they were the product of an opposing Power to that of the Son. 
The Fate was certainly so regarded by men who were under its sway; but our 
treatise is endeavouring precisely to give an insight into the state of tilings beyond 
the Fate. The burden of its teaciting is that all these oppositions are really illusory; 
man can transcend these limitations and come into the freedom of the Sons of 
God. Even the most terrible and fundamental oppositions are not really so, but all 
are Self-limitations of God’s Will; and man is Son of God co-equal with Him. 

THE FIRST MEN 

16. Our treatise then describes the first appearance of man on earth, which it 
regards as a great mystery never before revealed, “the mystery kept hid until this 


- 23 - 



day.” This I take to mean that it had hitherto never been written about, but had 
been kept as a great secret. 

This secret was the doctrine that the first men, of which there were seven types, 
were hermaphrodites, and not only so, but lived in the air; their frames were of fire 
and spirit, and not of the earth-water elements. The Celestial Man, or type of 
humanity, was gradually differentiating himself from his proper nature of Light and 
Life, and taking on bodies of fire and air, was changing into mind (Light-fire) and 
soul (Life-spirit). 

This presumably lasted for long periods of time, the lower animal forms 
gradually evolving to greater complexity as Nature strove to copy the “Form” of 
Man, and Man devolving gradually until there was a union, and the human subtle 
form could find vehicles among the highest animal shapes. 

The first incarnate men appear to have been at first also hermaphrodite; and it 
must have been a time when everything was in a far greater state of flux than things 
are now. 


“INCREASE AND MULTIPLY” 

18. This period of pre-sexual or bi-sexual development having come to an end, 
the separation of the sexes took place. The commandment is given by the Word: 
“Increase ye in increasing and multiply in multitude” (a'U^avsaOs £v ati^fjasi xal 
7iM]0uvsa0s £v %kr\Qei). 

It is true that this is reminiscent of the oft-repeated formula in the Greek 
Targum of Genesis, - cct)£;avsG0s xal 7iM]0uvsa0s, 86 - but it is only slightly 
reminiscent, the main injunction being strengthened, and the rest of the logos being 
quite different from any tiling found in Genesis. As nothing else in the whole 
treatise can be referred to direct Hebrew influence, we must conclude that the 
formula was, so to speak, in the air, and has so crept into our treatise 87 . 

It has, however, given rise to a diatribe copied on to the margin of one MS.- B. 
(Par. 1220) - by a later hand, and incorporated into the text of M. (Vat. 951). It is in 
B. ascribed to Psellus 88 , who goes out of his way to stigmatize Hermes as a sorcerer 
and a plagiarist throughout of Moses; in brief, the Devil is a thief of the Truth to 
lead men astray. In this we learn more about the limitation of the so-called “Prince 
of Philosophers” than of aught else. 

19. This increasing and multiplying, the perpetual coupling of bodies, and the 
birth of new ones, is effected by the Fate, or Harmony of the Formative Spheres, 
the Engine of Birth, set under Forethought or Providence (xqovoia). This Pronoia 
can be none else than Nature herself as the Wisdom or Knowledge of God - in 
other words, His Will. 


86 Cf. Gen. i. 22 and 28, viii. 17, ix. 7, and xxxv. 11 (in the singular). 

87 See, however, Frag. XX., and R. 126, n. 1. Cf. the same formula in C. H., iii. (iv.) 3 (P. 32, 11), and R. 116, n. 2. 

88 And is printed in Boissonade’s (V. C.) edition of Michael Psellus, De Operatione Damonum (Niirnberg, 1838), pp. 
153, 154. 

89 If, indeed, the Psellus of our scholion is the Younger Psellus (eleventh century); the De Op. Dam., however, is 
ascribed by many to the Elder Psellus (ninth century). See, however, the section “The Original MS. of our Corpus” 
in ch. i. of the “Prolegomena.” 


- 24 - 



LOVE 


The motive power of all is Love. If this Love manifests itself as Desire for things 
of Matter, the Lover stays in Darkness wandering; if it becomes the Will to know 
Light, the Lover becomes the Knower of himself, and so eventually at-one with 
Good. 

20. But why should love of body merit Death - that is to say, make man mortal? 
The disciple attempts an explanation from what he has seen. Although his answer 
is approved, the meaning is by no means clear. 

The physical body, or body in the sense-world, is composed of the Moist 
Nature, which in a subsequent phase remains as Water-Earth, and in a still 
subsequent phase divides itself into the elements of physical earth, water, and air. 
The dissolution of the combination of these elements is effected by Death - that is, 
Darkness, the Drainer of the Water, the Typhonean Power. Water must thus here 
symbolize the Osirian Power of fructification and holding together. The Moist 
Nature then seems to be differentiated from the Darkness by the energizing of 
Light in its most primitive brooding. But seeing that the Light is also Life, the 
Darkness, which is posited as the ultimate opposite, is Death. 


THE WAY OF DEATHLESSNESS 

21. The Way of Deathlessness is then considered. The disciple repeats his lesson, 
and the Master commends him; the Way Up is the Path of Self-knowledge. 

Still the disciple cannot believe that this is for him; he cannot understand that 
Mind is in him, or rather is himself, in so much as Mind as Teacher seems to be 
without him. The play is on Mind and mind; the one gives the certitude of 
Immortality, the other is still bound by the illusion of Death. The disciple has not 
this certitude; Mind, then, is not his. 

22. The Master then further explains the mystery. Gnosis must be preceded by 
moral purification; there must be a turning-away before the Re-turn can be 
accomplished. The whole nature must be changed. Yet every effort that the little 
man seems to make of his own striving is really the energizing of the Great Man. 

23. Those, however, who yield themselves to lower desires, drive the Mind away, 
and their appetites are only the more strengthened by the mind. 

The text of this paragraph is very corrupt, so that the exact sense of the original 
is not recoverable; and this makes it all the more difficult to understand what is 
meant by the Avenging Daimon, the Counterpart of the Mind. This difficulty is 
increased by § 24, where we are told that the “way of life” (to fjOoc) is at death 
surrendered to the Daimon. 

If, however, the reader will refer to the section on “The Vision of Er” (in the 
Miscellanea of the “Prolegomena”), which in my original MS. followed as a 
Digression on this passage, he will be put in contact with the Platonic view of the 
Daimon and “way of life”; in our treatise, however, the teaching is of a more 
intimate character, and must be taken in conjunction with C. H., x. (xi.) 16 and 21, 
where we shall comment on it at further length. 


- 25 - 



THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 


24. The subject of instruction is now the Way Above (tivoSoc), or ascent of the 
soul out of the body at death. 

The physical body is left to the work of change and dissolution. The life of 
integration and conservation ceases, and the life of disintegration begins. 

The form (siSoc) thus vanishes, apparently from the man’s consciousness; that is 
to say, presumably, he is no longer clothed in the form of his physical body, but is 
apparently in some other vehicle; the particular fixed form, or “way of life,” or 
“habit,” he wore on earth being handed over to the Daimon deprived of all energy, 
so that apparently it becomes an empty shell. 

The next sentence is a great puzzle, and I can only guess at the meaning. The 
senses which had previously been united by the mind become separate - that is, 
instead of a whole they become parts (jxspr]), they return to the natural animal state 
of sensation, and the animal part of man, or his vehicle of passion and desire, 
begins in its turn to disintegrate, the mind or reason {logos) being gradually separated 
from it, or, rather, its true nature showing forth in the man as he gradually strips off 
the irrational tendencies of the energies. 

25. Those irrational tendencies have their sources in the Harmony of the Fate- 
Sphere of seven subordinate spheres or zones; and in these zones he leaves his 
inharmonious propensities, deprived of their energy. For the Harmony is only evil 
apparently; it is really the Engine of Justice and Necessity to readjust the foolish 
choice of the soul - that is, to purify its irrational desires, or those propensities in it 
that are not under the sway of right reason and philosophy. For a better 
understanding of the characteristics ascribed to the “seven spheres,” we must “run 
off’ into another Digression, which the reader will find relegated to ch. xii. of the 
“Prolegomena,” under the title “Concerning the Seven Zones and their 
Characteristics.” This, then, having been taken as a direct commentary on § 25, we 
continue with the text of our treatise. 

THE EIGHTH SPHERE 

26. The soul of the initiated strips itself naked of the “garment of shame,” the 
selfish energizings, and stands “clothed in its own power.” This refers probably to 
the stripping off of the “carapace of selfhood,” the garments woven by its vices, 
and the putting on of the “wedding garment” of its virtues. 

This state of existence is called the Eighth 90 , a state of comparative “sameness” 
as transcending the zones of “difference.” It is the Ogdoad of the Gnostics, the 
Jerusalem Above, the plane of the Ego in its own form, the natural state of “those- 
that-are.” 

In another sense it may perhaps mean that the man, after passing through the 
phases of the lower mind, now enters within into the region of the pure mind, the 
Higher Ego, and there is at-oned with all the experiences of his past lives that are 
worthy of immortality, his virtuous energizings, - the “those-that-are,” that perhaps 


90 Cf. Com. on C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 14. 


- 26 - 



constitute the “crown of mighty lives” sung of by the Pythian Oracle when 
celebrating the death of Plotinus 91 . 

In this state the man, who has freed himself from the necessity of reincarnation, 
hears the Song of the Powers above the Ogdoad - that is to say, in Gnostic terms, 
the Hymn of the /Rons of the Pleroma. Such a man would have reached the 
consummation of his earthly pilgrimage, and be ready to pass on into die Christ- 
state, or, at any rate, the state of super-man. He would be the Victor who had won 
the right of investiture with the Robe of Glory, and the dignity of the crowning 
with the Kingship of the Heavens. This Final Initiation is most beautifully set forth 
in the opening pages of the Pistis Sophia, and especially in the Song of the Powers 
(pp. 17 ff.) beginning with the words: “Come unto us, for we are thy fellow- 
members. We are all one with thee.” 

The consummation of the mystery is that the alter-egos of the Individual Ego, or 
the sum total of purified personalities which in that state constitute its membership, 
or taxis, of their own selves surrender themselves to a fullness of union or a 
transcendency of separation, in which they become the powers or energies of a 
New Man, the true Son of Man; they pass into a state where they each blend with 
all, and yet lose nothing of themselves, but rather find in this new union the 
consummation of all their powers. In this state of Sonship of the Divine they are 
no longer limited by bodies, nor even by partial souls or individual minds; but, 
becoming Powers, they are not only in God, but one with the Divine Will - nay, in 
final consummation, God Himself. 

27. Of such a nature was the Shepherd; He, too, was the Christ of God, the Son 
of the Father, who could take all forms to carry out the Divine Will. When the 
form, - even though that form might for the disciple take on the appearance of the 
cosmos itself, as he conceived it, - had served its purpose, the Shepherd once more 
“mingled with the Powers.” 

THE THREE “BODIES” OF THE BUDDHA 

The Shepherd was a Christ for those who prefer the name of Christian 
Tradition, a Buddha for those who are more familiar with Eastern terms. And that 
this is so may be clearly seen by considering the so-called “three bodies” ( trikayam ) 
of a or the Buddha, for Buddhahood is a state beyond individuality in the separated 
sense in which we understand the term. 

In the Chinese Version of Ashvaghosha’s now lost Sanskrit treatise, Mahay ana- 
shraddhotpada-shastrcd 2 ’, we read: 

“It is characteristic of all the Buddhas that they consider all sentient beings as 
their own self, and do not cling to their individual forms. How is this? Because they 
know truthfully that all sentient beings as well as their own self come from one and 
the same Suchness, and no distinction can be established among them.” 


91 Cf. Porphyry, Plotini Vita, xxii., ed. Creuzer (Oxford, 1835); also Theosoph. Ret’. (July 1898), p. 403. 

92 Ashvaghosha’s Discourse on the Awakening op Faith in the Mahay ana. Translated for the first time from the Chinese 
Version by Teitaro Suzuki (Chicago, 1900). Mahayana means the “Great Vehicle” of Buddhism. 


- 27 - 



“All Tathagatas are the Dharinakaya 9 , itself, are the liighest truth (paramarthasatya ) 
itself, and have nothing to do with conditionality ( samvrittisatya ) and compulsory 
actions; whereas the seeing, hearing etc., of the sentient being diversify the Activity 94 of 
Tathagatas. 

“Now this Activity has a twofold aspect. 

“The first depends on the phenomena-particularizing consciousness by means of 
which the Activity is conceived by the minds of all who fall short of the state of a 
Bodhisattva in their various degrees. This aspect is called the Body of 
Transformation (Nirmanakaya). 

“But as the beings of this class do not know that the Body of Transformation is 
merely the shadow [or reflection] of their own evolving consciousness, they 
imagine it comes from some external sources, and so they give it a corporeal 
limitation. But the Body of Transformation [or what amounts to the same thing, 
the Dharmakaya] has nothing to do with Limitation or measurement.” 

That is to say, a Buddha can only communicate with such minds by means of a 
form, that form being really that of their own most highly evolved consciousness. 
There are, however, others who have the consciousness of the “formless” state, but 
have not yet reached the Nirvanic Consciousness. These in this system are called 
Bodhisattvas. 

“The second aspect [of the Dharmakaya] depends on the activity-consciousness 
( karmavijnana ), by means of which the Activity is conceived by the minds of the 
Bodhisattvas while passing from their first aspiration (chittotpadd) stage up to the 
height of Bodhisattva-hood. This is called the Body of Bliss (Sambhogakaya)” (pp. 
100 , 101 ). 

We have used the term “formless state” in the penultimate paragraph to signify 
the states of consciousness in “worlds” called Arupa; but these are only “formless” 
for consciousness which has not reached the Bodhisattva level - presumably the 
Buddhic plane of Neo-theosophical nomenclature. 

For “this Body has infinite forms. The form has infinite attributes. The Attribute 
has infinite excellencies. And the accompanying reward of Bodhisattvas - that is, 
the region where they are predestined to be born - also has infinite merits and 
ornamentations. Manifesting itself everywhere, the Body of Bliss is infinite, 
boundless, limitless, unintermittent, directly coming forth from the Mind” (p. 101). 

The older Chinese Version says: “It is boundless, cannot be exhausted, is free 
from the signs of limitation. Manifesting itself wherever it should manifest itself, it 
always exists by itself and is never destroyed” (p. 101, n. 2). 

In other words, one who has reached the Nirvanic Consciousness - that is to say, 
a Master - can teach or be active on “planes” that are as yet unmanifest to us 
ordinary folk; these “planes,” however, even when the disciple is conscious of 
them, are conditioned by the self-limitation of his own imperfection. The Vehicles 
of this Activity are called Dharmakaya, Sambhogakaya and Nirmanakaya; and the 
limitation of their Activity is determined on the side of the disciple by the degree of 


93 Lit. Body of the Law. 

94 The italics are mine throughout. 


- 28 - 



his ability to function consciously in those states which are known in Neo- 
theosophical nomenclature respectively as those of Atman, Buddhi and Higher 
Manas, or, in more general terms, those of the divine, spiritual and human aspects 
of the self. 

In the first degree of conscious discipleship, then, the Master communicates with 
His disciples and teaches them by means of the Nirmanakaya; that is to say, He 
quickens the highest form of consciousness or conception of masterhood they 
have so far attained to - taking the form of their greatest love, perhaps, as they have 
known Him in the flesh, or as He has been told of as existing in the flesh, but not 
His own-form, which would transcend their consciousness. 

The next stage is when the disciple learns to transcend his own “egoity,” in the 
ordinary sense of the word; this does not mean to say that his true individuality is 
destroyed, but instead of being tied down to one ego-vehicle, he has gained the 
power of manifesting himself wherever and however he will, at any moment of 
time; in brief, the power of self-generation on the plane of egoity, in that he has 
reached a higher state which is free from the limitations of a single line of egoity. 

He now begins to realise in the very nature of his being that the “Self is in all and 
all in the Self.” Such a disciple, or Bodhisattva, is taught by the Master in this state 
of being, and the Kaya which he supplies for the energizing of his beloved Father is 
perfecdy unintelligible to us, and can only be described as an expanded 
consciousness of utmost sympathy and compassion, which not only strives to 
blend with the Life of all beings, but also with the One Being in the world for him, 
the Beloved. Such a sensing of the Master’s Presence is called the Sambhogakaya of 
the Master, His Body of Bliss. 

There is a still higher Perfection, the Dharmakaya, or Own-Nature of 
Masterhood. But how should the dim mind of one who is Without imagine the 
condition of One who is not only Within, but who combines both the Without and 
the Within in the Transcendent Unity of the Perfect Fullness? 

THE PREACHING OF THE GNOSIS 

27. With the exposition of the Consummation of die Teaching and the return to 
earth of the consciousness of the Seer, our treatise breaks off into a graphic 
instruction of how the Gnosis is to be utilized. The Wisdom is no man’s property; 
he who receives it holds it in trust for the benefit of the world-folk. 

I am, however, inclined to believe that §§ 27 to 29 are a later interpolation, and 
that the treatise originally ran straight on after the conclusion of the Shepherd’s 
Instruction with the words: “But I recorded in my heart the Shepherd’s 
benefaction” (§ 30). 

Until the end of § 26 we have moved in the atmosphere of an inner intimate 
personal instruction, set forth in a form evidently intended only for the few; indeed, 
as we find in other treatises emphatic injunctions to keep the teaching secret, we 
cannot but conclude that the oldest and most authoritative document of the school 
was guarded with the same secrecy. The general impression created by the 
instruction is not only that it itself is the consummation and reward of a strict and 


- 29 - 



stem probation, and not a sermon to be preached on the house-tops, but also that 
those who followed that way were not propagandists, but rather members of a 
select philosophic community. 

With § 27, however, all is changed; we are introduced to the picture of a man 
burning with enthusiasm to communicate, if not the direct teaching itself, at any 
rate the knowledge of its existence and saving power to all without distinction. In a 
few graphic sentences the history of the fortunes of this propagandist endeavour is 
sketched. An appeal is made of the most uncompromising nature; it is a clarion call 
to repentance, and we seem to be moving in an atmosphere that is Hebrew rather 
than Greek, prophetical rather than philosophical. 

It would seem almost that this propagandist phase had been forced upon the 
community rather than that it was natural to it; something seems to have occurred 
which obliged it to enter the arena of general life and proclaim its existence 
publicly. What this compulsion was we have no means of determining with any 
exactitude, for the historical indications are very obscure. If we were to conjecture 
that it was the vigorous preaching of nascent Christianity which wrought this 
change, we should, I think, be taking part for whole, for prior to Christianity there 
was the most energetic propaganda made by the Jews, the intensity of which may 
be estimated by the phrase “Ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte,” and 
the nature of which may be most clearly seen in the propaganda of the Sibylline 
writers, with whose diction the appeals to the “earth-born folk” in our text may be 
aptly compared, while the prayer at sunset may be paralleled with the prayers of the 
Essenes and Therapeuts. 

On the other hand, the tradition of the Gnosis and Saving Faith preached by our 
Pcemandrists is distinctly not Hebrew; it is a philosophizing of other materials - 
materials which, as we have seen, were also partly used by Jewish and Christian 
mystics, and adapted to their own special traditions. 

We thus see that at the time when Christianity came to birth there were many 
rival traditions contending for general recognition, all of them offering instruction 
in the Gnosis and hopes of Salvation, and I myself believe that all of them were 
partial manifestations of the impartial Quickening of the Spiritual Life which was at 
that time more abundantly poured forth than ever before or after in the Western 
world. 

With § 30, if my conjecture of an interpolation is correct, the original treatise is 
continued, and we are told the nature of the awakening of the spiritual 
consciousness which has come to the new-born disciple. 

Henceforth all things are new for him, they all have new meanings. He has 
become a man, instead of a “procession of fate”; he has reached the “Plain of 
Truth.” In Christian terms the Christ has been born in his heart consciously. 

A HYMN OF PRAISE AND PRAYER FOR THE GNOSIS 

31. The treatise is concluded with a most noble hymn, in which the further 
growth and effort of the man in spirit is set forth. Henceforth his effort will be to 


- 30 - 



become like unto the Father Himself, to pass from Sonship into the Perfection of 
perfection, Identity or At-one-ment with the Father. 

The sentence, “That I may give the Light to those in ignorance of the Race, my 
Brethren and Thy Sons,” seems to me to be either an interpolation, showing the 
same tendency as that of the propagandist section, or an indication that the whole 
hymn was added at the same time as the propagandist paragraphs, for the treatise 
proper seems to end naturally and consistently in the Hellenistic form of the 
tradition with the words, “I reached the Plain of Truth .” 95 

THE NAME “POIMANDRES” 

Many have already remarked that the name “Poimandres” is formed irregularly 
in Greek, and this has led to an interesting speculation by Granger, who writes: 

‘While, however, the name Poimandres does not answer to any Greek original, it 
is a close transliteration of a Coptic phrase. In the dialect of Upper Egypt p e nfrftre 
means ‘the witness. ’ That the Coptic article fp e ] should he treated as part of the name 
itself is not unusual; compare the name Pi of 6 . 2 Such a title corresponds very closely in 
style with the titles of other works of this same period - for example, the True Word of 
Celsus, or the Perfect Word, which is an alternative title of the Asclepius. The term 
Poemandres, therefore, on this supposition, contains an allusion to the widely spread 
legend of Hermes as witness 97 , a legend which is verified for us from several sources. 

But the writer has adapted the details to his purpose. Hermes is not himself the 
witness, hut the herald of the witness. ” 98 

Granger then propounds the very strange theory, contradicted by all the 
phenomena and opposed to every authority, that the Coptic Gnostic works of the 
Askew and Bruce Codices were originally composed in Coptic with the adoption of 
Greek technical terms, whereas they are manifestly translations from the Greek. 
He, however, continues: 

‘There seems no adequate reason why such works may not have been composed 
in Coptic. The Egyptian Gnostic writings of the third century exhibit the same 
qualities of style as the Coptic biographies and apocalypses of the fourth and 
following centuries. And so I am prepared to believe that the Poemandres may have 
been first composed in Coptic. Or shall we say that the work was current from the 
first in both languages?” 99 

We should say that the last guess is most highly improbable, and only denotes 
the indecision of the writer. The original “Poemandres” may very well have been 
composed not in Coptic but in Demotic; but the reasons given by Granger, as 
based on the phenomena of the Gnostic Coptic writings, are not to be seriously 
considered. Nevertheless, the name “Poimandres” may be a Greek transliteration of 
an Egyptian name, though we hardly think that “The Witness” will suit the theme. 


95 It is to be noticed that the Hymn is a Song of Holiness. “Holy art thou” is nine times repeated - most probably 
intentionally. This was noticed long ago by Casaubon. See R. 58, n. 3. 

96 Palladius, Hist. Hans., 89. 

97 G. has just referred to the story of Hermes being witness for Horns when indicted on a charge of bastardy by 
Typhon, as related in Plutarch. 

98 Granger (F.), “The Poemandres of Hermes Trismegistus,”/. Th. Stud., vol. v., no. 191, p. 400. 

99 Ibid., p. 401. 


-31 - 


In any case “Man-Shepherd” was certainly the idea conveyed to the Non-Egyptian 
by the name, however philologically unsound its form may be in Greek. 


THE GOOD SHEPHERD 

It has been no part of our task to attempt to trace the Hermes-idea along the line 
of pure Greek descent, for this would have led us too far from our immediate 
subject. There is, however, one element of that tradition which is of great interest, 
and to which we may draw the attention of the reader in passing. The beautiful idea 
of the Christ as the “Good Shepherd” is familiar to every Christian child. Why the 
Christ is the Shepherd of all men is shown us by this first of our marvelous 
treatises. In it we have the universal doctrine apart from any historical dogma, the 
eternal truth of an ever-recurring fact, and not the exaggeration of one instance of 
it. 

The representation of Christ as the Good Shepherd was one of the earliest 
efforts of Christian art; but the prototype was far earlier than Christianity - in fact, 
it was exceedingly archaic. Statues of Hermes Kriophoros, or Hermes with a ram or 
lamb standing beside him, or in his arms, or on his shoulder, were one of the most 
favourite subjects for the chisel in Greece. We have specimens dating to the archaic 
period of Greek art 1011 . Hermes in these archaic statues has a pointed cap, and not 
the winged head-dress and sandals of later art. This type in all probability goes back 
to Chaldaean symbolic art, to the bearers of the twelve “signs of the zodiac,” the 
“sacred animals.” These were, in one human correspondence, the twelve septs or 
classes of priests. Here we see that the Greek tradition itself was not pure Aryan 
even in its so-called archaic period. Chaldaea had given of her wisdom to post- 
diluvian Greece, even as she had perchance been in relation with Greece before the 
“flood.” Here, then, we have another element in the Hermes-idea. In fact, nowhere 
do we find a pure line of tradition; in every religion there are blendings and have 
been blendings. There was unconscious syncretism (and conscious also) long 
before the days of Alexandria, for unconscious syncretism is as old as race- 
blendings. Even as all men are kin, so are popular cults related; and even as the 
religion of nobler souls is of one paternity, so are the theosophies of all religions 
from one source. 

One of the greatest secrets of the innermost initiated circles was the grand fact 
that all the great religions had their roots in one mother soil. And it was the 
spreading of the consciousness of this stupendous truth which subsequently - after 
the initial period of scepticism of the Alexandrian schools - gave rise to the many 
conscious attempts to synthesise the various phases of religion, and make 
“symphonies” of apparendy contradictory philosophical tenets. Modern research, 
which is essentially critical and analytical, and rarely synthetical, classifies all these 
attempts under the term “syncretism,” a word which it invariably uses in a 
depreciatory sense, as characterising the blending of absolutely incompatible 
elements in the most uncritical fashion. But when the pendulum swings once more 


100 See Reseller’s Lexikon, art. “Hermes.” “Hermes in der Kunst” - “Periode des Archaismus.” 


- 32 - 



towards the side of synthesis, as it must do in the coming years - for we are but 
repeating to-day in greater detail what happened in the early centuries - then 
scholarship will once more recognise the unity of religion under the diversity of 
creeds and return to the old doctrine of die mysteries. 

In connection with the “Good Shepherd” glyph, it will be useful to quote from 
Granger’s instructive exposition on the subject 101 , where he writes: 

“Since the identification of Jesus with Hermes took place in circles which formed 
part of the Christian community 102 , we shall not be surprised to find that one of the 
leading types of Christian art, the Good Shepherd, was immediately adopted from a 
current representation of the Greek Hermes 103 . As we see from Hippolytus (Refut., v. 

7), the Gnostics were especially interested in Hermes as Hermes Hogius, a type which 
was increasingly frequent in later Greek art. And this epithet was connected by them 
with the conception of Jesus as the Hogos. Now another type of Hermes, the 
Kriophoros, seemed to bring together Jesus as the Hogos and Jesus as the Good 
Shepherd. These representations of Jesus begin in the second century; and so they 
correspond in order of time with the appearance of the Gospel according to the 
Hgyptians, and of those Gnostic compositions which largely depend upon it 104 . 

“Another fact leads us to think that the figure of the Good Shepherd had its roots 
in a previous tradition. ‘It is probable that there were no statues before the age of 
Constantine, except the Good Shepherd. ’ 105 We must therefore add Hermes to the 
list of pagan types which were taken over for its own purpose by the rising Christian 
art. 

“Moreover, we are enabled to advance one step further the long-standing controversy 
as to the portraits of Jesus. Since the figure of the Good Shepherd is borrowed from 
Greek sculpture, it cannot be used as evidence for the earliest conceptions about the 
appearance of Jesus. And so the arguments of Farrar and others fall to the ground, in 
so far as they take the presence of this type to show that there was no genuine tradition 
of Christ’s appearance 106 . 

‘We are now in a position to throw a little further light upon the famous 
inscription of Abercius. The inscription speaks of a Shepherd - Who feedeth on the 
plains His flock of sheep, and hath great eyes that gage forth every way. For He did 
teach me [ how to understand and] scriptures worthy to believe. ’ 107 

‘The Shepherd, whose great eyes look in every direction, is no other than Hermes 
treated as a symbol of Christ. And so some of the arguments which may be directed 


101 Op. tit., pp. 408 ff. 

102 G. seems here to be referring to the Naassene Document, but without any suspicion apparently of its composite 
character. 

103 See Sittl, Klassische Kunstarchaologie, 111, 809, 819. 

104 G. here again refers apparently to the Naassene Documents, which, however, did not depend on the Gospel 
according to the Egyptians, as we have shown; nor have we any sure ground for dating this widespread mystic gospel of 
Egypt as being of the second century rather than of the first. G. (p. 411) suggests that the scene of the Gospel of the 
Egyptians was on top of the Mount of Olives after the resurrection, which may very well be the case, and that the title 
of C. H., xiii. (xiv.), “The Secret Sermon on the Mountain,” has reference to this gospel, which is by no means 
probable, for our sermon keeps entirely within its own tradition in its setting. 

105 Lowrie, Christian Art and Archeology, p. 290. 

106 Taken in connection with the above quotation from Lowrie, we should say that it disposes of the whole 
contention. And for further corroboration of this view we would refer the reader to the Acts of John. 

107 G. gives the Greek text only, omitting the first line, which runs: “The disciple of the Pure Shepherd.” Cf. R. 115. 


- 33 - 



against the Christian character of this inscription, and to which Harnack 10S attaches 
an exaggerated weight, are turned aside. ” 

With all of this may be compared what we have already written in the 
Prolegomena on “The Popular Symbolic Representation of the Shepherd” in the 
chapter on “‘Hernias’ and ‘Hermes.’” 

Compare also the Hymn to Attis in the Naassene tradition, where he is invoked 
“as Pan, as Bacchus, as Shepherd of bright stars.” This is the macrocosmic side of 
the microcosmic mystery. 

We should also not forget the interesting grouping on a Christian lamp 109 and 
gem 110 , which goes back very probably to the third century 111 . It represents the 
Christ as the Good Shepherd, after the Hermes type, with a lamb on his shoulder. 
Above his head are the Seven “Planets,” the Lords of the Fate, and in addition the 
Sun and Moon on either side, as is frequently the case in Mithraic representations. 
Round his feet seven lambs 112 crowd, symbolical of the “seven peoples,” one under 
each “planet.” Moreover, on the right is Noah’s dove and ark, and Jonah being 
swallowed by the whale, while on the left is Jonah again, vomited on to the land 
and peacefully resting beneadi the shade of the miraculous gourd-tree. 

This seems to me to be a symbol of the mysteries, a glyph of rebirth. The lambs 
are the purified lower nature of the man, the purest essence of which is exalted to 
the head of the Great Man. This purified “little man” is swallowed by the Cosmic 
Fish, the Great Mother, the Womb of the Almighty, and the man is born again to 
rest under his own tree in the Paradise of the Further Shore. 

It is also of interest to note that die Hermetic colonies already planted in 
Mesopotamia, in the earliest Islamic times of which the Arabian writers tell us, 
called their head the “Shepherd.” 11 ’ 

From all of which we conclude that the Good Shepherd was one of the leading 
ideas of Hellenistic theology. 


108 Cf. Class. Ret’., ix. 297. 

109 Garucci, Storia della Arte Christiana, vi. tav. 474; Perret, Catacombes de Rome, tab. 17, no. 5. 

110 Perret, ibid., tab. 16, no. 80. 

111 R. 113. 

112 The gem has only six. 

113 Cf. Chwolsohn (D.), Die Ssabier tend der Ssabismus, ii. 628. Cf. R. 166 ff. 


- 34 - 




CORPUS HERMETICUM II. 

THE GENERAL SERMON 

THE title only is preserved in our Corpus, the text having 
disappeared with the loss of a quire or quires before the 
parent copy came into the hands of Psellus. 



- 35 - 



+- - » 

CORPUS HERMETICUM II. (III.) 

TO ASCLEPIUS 
(Text: P. 19-30; Pat. 18b-20.) 

1 . Hermes. 1 

LL that is moved, Asclepius, is it not moved in 
something and by something? 

Asclepius. Assuredly. 

Her. And must not that in which it’s moved be greater 
than the moved? 

Asc. It must. 

Her. Mover, again, has greater power than moved? 

Asc. It has, of course. 

Her. The nature, furthermore, of that in which it’s moved 
must be quite other from the nature of the moved? 

Asc. It must completely. 

2. Her. Is not, again, this cosmos vast, [so vast] that than it 
there exists no body greater? 

Asc. Assuredly. 

Her. And massive too, for it is crammed with multitudes 
of other mighty frames, nay rather all the other bodies 
that there are? 

Asc. It is. 

Her. And yet the cosmos is a body? 

Asc. It is a body. 

Her. And one that’s moved? 

3. Asc. Assuredly. 

Her. Of what size, then, must be the space in which it’s 
moved; and of what kind [must be] the nature [of that 
space]? Must it not be far vaster [than the cosmos], in 



1 From here till the end of § 4 is quoted by Stobteus, Phjs., xviii. 2; G. pp. 147-149; W. 157, 6 ff. 


- 36 - 


order that it may be able to find room for its continued 
course, so that the moved may not be cramped for want 
of room and lose its motion? 

Asc. Something, Thrice-greatest one, it needs must be, 
immensely vast. 

4. Her. And of what nature? Must it not be, Asclepius, of 
just the contrary? And is not contrary to body bodiless? 

Asc. Agreed. 

Her. Space, then, is bodiless. But bodiless must either be 
some godlike thing or God [Himself]. And by “some 
godlike thing” I mean no more the generable but the 
ingenerable 2 . 

5. If, then, space be some godlike thing, it is substantial 3 ; 
but if ’tis God [Himself], it transcends substance. But it is 
to be thought of otherwise [than God], and in this way. 

God is first “thinkable” 4 5 for us, not for Himself, for that 
the thing that’s thought doth fall beneath the thinker’s 
sense. God then can not be “thinkable” unto Himself, in 
that He’s thought of by Himself as being nothing else 
than what He thinks. But He is “something else” for us, 
and so He’s thought of by us. 

6. If space is, therefore, to be thought, [it should] not, 
[then, be thought as] God, but space. If God is also to be 
thought, [He should] not [be conceived] as space, but 
energy that can contain [all space] . 

Further 3 , all that is moved is moved not in the moved but 
in the stable. And that which moves [another] is of course 
stationary, for ’tis impossible that it should move with it. 

Asc. How is it, then, that things down here, Thrice- 
greatest one, are moved with those that are [already] 


2 That is, beyond genesis, the universe of becoming, or the sensible universe. 

3 ohaiwSs?. 

4 Or intelligible. 

5 From here till the end of § 9 (exclusive of the last sentence) is quoted by Stobasus, Phjs., xix. 2; G. pp. 154-157; W. 
163, 14 ff. 


- 37 - 



moved? For thou hast said 6 the errant spheres were 
moved by the inerrant one. 

Her. This is not, O Asclepius, a moving with , but one 
against, they are not moved with one another, but one 
against the other. It is this contrariety which turneth the 
resistance of their motion into rest. For that resistance is 
the rest of motion. 

7. Hence, too, the errant spheres, being moved contrarily 
to the inerrant one, are moved by one another by mutual 
contrariety, [and also] by the stable one through 
contrariety itself. And this can otherwise not be. 

The Bears 7 up there, which neither set nor rise, think’st 
thou they rest or move? 

Asc. They move, Thrice-greatest one. 

Her. And what their motion, my Asclepius? 

Asc. Motion that turns for ever round the same. 

Her. But revolution - motion round same - is fixed by rest. 
For “round-the-same” doth stop “beyond- same.” 
“Beyond-same” then, being stopped, if it be steadied in 
“round-same” - the contrary stands firm, being rendered 
ever stable by its contrariety. 

8. Of this I’ll give thee here on earth an instance, which 
the eye can see. Regard the animals down here, - a man, 
for instance, swimming! The water moves, yet the 
resistance of his hands and feet give him stability, so that 
he is not borne along with it, nor sunk thereby. 

Asc. Thou hast, Thrice-greatest one, adduced a most clear 
instance. 

Her. All motion, then, is caused in station and by station. 

The motion, therefore, of the cosmos (and of every other 
hylic animal 8 ) will not be caused by things exterior to the 
cosmos, but by things interior [outward] to the exterior - 


6 Sc. in some previous sermon. 

7 Sc Ursa Major and Ursa Minor. 

8 That is, living material organism. 


- 38 - 



such [things] as soul, or spirit, or some such other thing 
incorporal. 

Tis not its body that doth move the living thing in it; nay, 
not even the whole [body of the universe a lesser] body 
e’en though there be no life in it 9 . 

9. Asc. What meanest thou by this, Thrice-greatest one? Is 
it not bodies, then, that move the stock and stone and all 
the other things inanimate? 

Her. By no means, O Asclepius. The something-in-the- 
body, the that-which-moves the thing inanimate, this 
surely’s not a body, for that it moves the two of them - 
both body of the lifter and the lifted? So that a thing that’s 
lifeless will not move a lifeless thing. That which doth 
move [another thing] is animate, in that it is the mover. 

Thou seest, then, how heavy laden is the soul, for it alone 
doth lift two bodies. That things, moreover, moved are 
moved in something as well as moved by something is 
clear. 

10. Asc. Yea 10 , O Thrice-greatest one, things moved must 
needs be moved in something void 11 . 

Her. Thou sayest well, O [my] Asclepius! 12 For naught of 
things that are is void. Alone the “is-not” is void [and] 
stranger to subsistence. For that which is subsistent can 
never change to void 1 ’. 

Asc. Are there, then, O Thrice-greatest one, no such 
things as an empty cask, for instance, and an empty jar, a 
cup and vat, and other things like unto them? 

Her. Alack, Asclepius, for thy far- wandering from the 
truth! Think’st thou that things most full and most replete 
are void? 


9 That is, in the lesser body. 

10 For a criticism of Parthey’s text of the following three paragraphs, see R., pp. 209, 300. Parthey had uncritically 
conflated the text of our Corpus and the readings of Stobteus, in ignorance that he had before him two different 
recensions of the same text. I follow Reitzenstein. 

11 Cf. P. S. A., xxxiii. 1. 

12 From here to the end of § 12 is quoted by Stobteus, Phys., xviii. 3; G. pp. 149-150; W. 158, 13 ff. 

13 The variant in Stobteus reads: “No single thing of things that are is void by reason of the [very nature of] 
subsistence. The ‘is’ could not be ‘is’ were it not full of subsistence [itself].” The rest of the variants need not be 
noted in translation. 


- 39 - 



11. Asc. How meanest thou, Thrice-greatest one? 

Her. Is not air body? 

Asc. It is. 

Her. And doth this body not pervade all things, and so, 
pervading, fill them? And “body”; doth body not consist 
from blending of the “four”? Full, then, of air are all thou 
callest void; and if of air, then of the “four”. 14 

Further, of this the converse follows, that all thou callest 
full are void - of air; for that they have their space filled 
out with other bodies, and, therefore, are not able to 
receive the air therein. These, then, which thou dost say 
are void, they should be hollow named, not void; for they 
not only are, but they are full of air and spirit. 

12. Asc. Thy argument {logos), Thrice-greatest one, is not to 
be gainsaid; air is a body. Further, it is this body which 
doth pervade all things, and so, pervading, fill them. What 
are we, then, to call that space in which the all doth move? 

Her. The Bodiless, Asclepius. 

Asc. What, then, is Bodiless? 

Her. ’Tis Mind and Reason (Logos), whole out of whole, all 
self- embracing, free from all body, from all error free, 
unsensible to body and untouchable, self stayed in self, 
containing all, preserving those that are, whose rays, to use 
a likeness, are Good, Truth, Light beyond light, the 
Archetype of soul. 

Asc. What, then, is God? 

13. Her. Not any one of these is He; for He it is that 
causeth them to be, both all and each and every thing of all 
that are. Nor hath He left a thing beside that is -not; but 
they are all from things -that- are and not from things-that- 
are-not. For that the things-that-are-not have naturally no 
power of being anything, but rather have the nature of the 


14 The physical elements - earth, air, water and fire - were supposed to be severally combinations of the Primal 
Elements, Earth, Air, Water and Fire, one Element dominating in each. Thus our air would consist of a proportion 
of all four Great Elements, but would have Air predominant in it; and so for the rest. 


- 40 - 



inability-to-be. And, conversely, the things-that-are have 
not the nature of some time not-being. 

14. Asc. What say’st thou ever, then, God is? 

Her. God, therefore, is not Mind, but Cause that the Mind 
is; God is not Spirit, but Cause that Spirit is; God is not 
Light, but Cause that the Light is. Hence should one 
honour God with these two names [the Good and Father] 
- names which pertain to Him alone and no one else. 

For no one of the other so-called gods, no one of men, or 
daimones, can be in any measure Good, but God alone; 
and He is Good alone and nothing else. The rest of things 
are separable all from the Good’s nature; for [all the rest] 
are soul and body, which have no space that can contain 1 ' 
the Good. 

15. For that as mighty is the Greatness of the Good as is 
the Being of all things that are - both bodies and things 
bodiless, things sensible and intelligible things. Call not 
thou, therefore, aught else Good, for thou would’st 
impious be; nor anything at all at any time call God but 
Good alone, for so thou would’st again be impious. 

16. Though, then, the Good is spoken of by all, it is not 
understood by all, what thing it is. Not only, then, is God 
not understood by all, but both unto the gods and some 
of men they out of ignorance do give the name of Good, 
though they can never either be or become Good. For 
they are very different from God, while Good can never 
be distinguished from Him, for that God is the same as 
Good. 

The rest of the immortal ones are natheless honoured 
with the name of God, and spoken of as gods; but God is 
Good not out of courtesy but out of nature. For that 
God’s nature and the Good is one; one is the kind of 
both, from which all other kinds [proceed]. 


15 In the original there is a word-play - grata (separable) and ywgfjoai (contain) - which is impossible to reproduce 
in translation. 


-41 - 



The Good is He who gives all things and naught 
receives 16 . God, then, doth give all things and receive 
naught. God, then, is Good, and Good is God. 

17. The other name of God is Father, again because He is 
the that-which-maketh all. The part of father is to make. 

Wherefore child-making is a very great and a most pious 
thing in life for them who think aright, and to leave life on 
earth without a child a very great misfortune and impiety; 
and he who hath no child is punished by the daimons 
after death. 

And this the punishment: that that man’s soul who hath 
no child, shall be condemned unto a body with neither 
man’s nor woman’s nature, a thing accurst beneath the 
sun. 

Wherefore, Asclepius, let not your sympathies be with the 
man who hath no child, but rather pity his mishap, 
knowing what punishment abides for him. 

Let all that has been said, then, be to thee, Asclepius, an 
introduction to the gnosis of the nature of all things. 


si 



T* * 




COMMENTARY 


“AN INTRODUCTION TO THE GNOSIS OF THE NATURE OF ALL THINGS” 

This treatise has no precise title, for, as we have already seen in treating of the 
make-up of the Corpus, the traditional title, “Of Hermes to Tat, the General 
Sermon,” found in all the MSS., cannot apply to our tractate, which is addressed to 
Asclepius, and from which Stobasus quotes under the general title, “Of Hermes, 
from the [Sermons] to Asclepius.” 

The supposition, however, that Sermon (II.) has dropped out from the parent 
copy of our Corpus, owing to the loss of one or more quires or quaternions, 
explains those phenomena so admirably, that it has only to be brought forward, as 
it has been by Reitzenstein, to carry conviction. 

It is a curious fact, however, that Stobseus starts his quotations from this treatise 
precisely with the same words with which our text begins; nevertheless these words 


16 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 3: Tis “He alone who taketh naught.” 


- 42 - 



plunge us so immediately into a secondary subject, that Reitzenstein thinks there 
may have been a more general introduction which Johannes may very well have 
omitted. 

That, however, the lost pages of our Corpus should have contained such an 
introduction, broken at precisely the very same point to a word, would seem to be a 
coincidence the reverse of probable; nevertheless the treatise itself purports to be a 
very formal one, for we learn from the concluding words (§ 17) that it was intended 
to be “An Introduction to the Gnosis (Tipoyvooaicc) of the Nature of All Tilings.” 

We are, therefore, driven to conclude that, in spite of a most improbable 
coincidence, the beginning may have been lost, and that we have therefore to regret 
the loss not only of the whole of the “General Sermon” to Tat, but also of the 
introduction to the “Introduction to the Gnosis” addressed to Asclepius, and 
therewith, in all probability, some precious indications of how “Tat” and 
“Asclepius” are to be precisely defined. 

Parthey’s conflated title (p. 19) from the MSS., and Stobasus, “Of Hermes the 
Thrice-greatest, the General Sermon to Asclepius,” must therefore be definitely 
abandoned, and, in lieu of the lost general title, we must be content with the simple 
heading, “To Asclepius.” 


SPACE IS A PLENUM 

The subject is that of the Fullness of Being or the Plenum of things. Space is a 
Plenum, - the fundamental concept of modern scientific speculation. 

Asclepius, however, must guard himself against the confusion of Space with 
God; for God is not Space, but Cause thereof, - the True Transcendency of “that 
which can contain all things” (§ 6). 

“In Him we move.” “All that is moved is moved in what is stable,” or “in Him 
who stands” (8v Scream); where it is to be noticed that the term, “He who stands,” 
is found in Philo, and is made much of in Gnostic tradition, especially in the so- 
called Simonian Gnosis, for in The Great Announcement , from which Hippolytus has 
preserved some passages, the Logos is called “He who stands” or “He who has 
stood, stands and will stand”. 1 This is the aspect of the Reason of things that holds 
and compacts all together, the Stock or Pillar of Immobility, the opposite aspect 
being that of the Separator or Divider; the two together forming the Cross of 
Manifestation, the resolution of the Sphere of Sameness. 

The World-Soul is in perpetual motion; this perpetual motion is ordered and 
reduced to a cosmos and harmony of motion by the introduction into it, by means 
of the Reason, of the root-forms of motion (mentioned in the Timaus and 
elsewhere); - up, down; right, left; front, back; in, out; round, - and no-motion. 

All bodies are essentially inert; it is the soul that moves them, either immediately 
or mediately (§ 9). 

What the precise meaning of § 10 may be I cannot say; the tradition of the 
original text was variable, showing that the copyists had difficulty with it. As, 
however, the doctrine throughout is that of a Plenum (as, indeed, it is elsewhere in 


17 R., p. 305, also makes a brief reference to this. 


- 43 - 



the Trismegistic writings), I can only suppose that the instructor of “Asclepius” was 
endeavouring to clinch his point by arguing that the only Void was the “is-not” or 
non-being; now as nonbeing cannot possibly “exist,” there can be no such thing as 
Void. 


THE SPOUSE OF DEITY 

That, then, in which “the All doth move,” in which all things “live and move and 
have their being,” is the Bodiless; in other words, the Mind or Reason of God, the 
Logos, - who, as Philo tells us, is the Place of God, - that is, Infinite Space itself, 
the Container of all tilings, the very Spouse of Deity. Spouse or Son, it matters not; 
that in which all moves and lives and breathes is Wisdom, Good and Truth, the 
/Ron of icons, Light of light, Life of life, the Archetype of Soul itself (§ 12). 

GOD IS CAUSE THAT SPIRIT IS 

“God, then, is not Spirit”, 18 much less “a spirit”, 19 “but Cause that Spirit is”; for 
God is “Good alone.” Therefore: “Call not thou aught else Good.” 

And now let us turn to F. C. Conybeare’s important criticism of Matt. xix. 17 = 
Mk. x. 18 = Lk. xviii. 19, in the first number of The Hibbert journal ' 2(l where he 
brings forward very strong evidence that the original reading was: “Call thou me 
not Good; One only is Good, God the Father,” - a reading known to Mar cion, the 
Clementine Homilies, Athanasius, Didymus, Tatian, and Origen (the two last 
inferentially). 

If we compare this with our text, “Call not thou, therefore, aught else Good, for 
thou would’st impious be; nor any thing at all at any time call Good but God 
alone,” and “He is Good alone and nothing else,” - we cannot fail to be struck with 
the precise similarity of the phrasing and blend of ideas. 

If, further, we take this in connection with the still more striking contrast, “God 
is not Spirit,” with the Johannine “God is Spirit,” we might at first sight almost 
persuade ourselves that our treatise had these Christian declarations immediately in 
mind. But the general phenomena of similarity of diction and idea of the 
Trismegistic literature with those of the New Testament documents is so much 
more satisfactorily explained by the fact that both literatures use mainly the 
common Hellenistic theological phrases of the time, that we need not distress 
ourselves with any suggestions either of plagiarism or of direct controversy. 

Doubtless the declaration, “God is Spirit,” was a commonplace among the 
religio-philosophical circles of the time, and Hermes is here simply refining on a 
common idea. The reading, “Call thou not me Good,” which appears to have been 
preserved mainly in Gnostic tradition, may also as easily have come from a similar 
general idea that the One and Only One was Good alone. 


18 Cf. Joh. iv. 24: “Ttveupa 6 ©so?.” 

19 As the A.V. has it erroneously. 

20 See his article, “Three Early Doctrinal Modifications of the Text of the Gospels,” in The Hibbert journal (Oct. 
1902), pp. 98-113. J. R. Wilkinson’s few remarks (H. ]., Ap. 1903, pp. 575, 576) on Conybeare’s criticism of this 
synoptic passage do not seem to me to be of any weight. 


- 44 - 



It is, moreover, of special interest to notice that the second clause of the 
Marcionite reading runs: “There is one [only] Good, God the Father,” while in our 
treatise the two names of God are given as Good and Fadier; and so we read (§ 
16): “God, then, is Good, and Good is God”; and immediately after (§ 17): “The 
other name of God is Father.” 21 

Striking however, as are those coincidences, we are nevertheless wholly 
unpersuaded that there was any immediate literary contact between those two sets 
of Scripture. All that can be said is that their literary similarities are due to a 
common theological language and their many points of contact in ideas to a 
generally common atmosphere of theological conceptions. 

HE WHO IS WITHOUT A WIFE IS HALF A MAN 

Again, the doctrine of the duty to beget children (§ 1 7) seems at first sight to be 
an interpolation by a Jewish editor, the Jews holding that “he who is without a wife 
is half a man.” We must, however, remember that the Egyptian priests were 
married, and that the rule with them, as with the Pythagoreans, was that a man 
should first of all discharge his duty 7 to society and live the “practical,” “political” or 
“social” life, before retiring into the life of contemplation. He must first beget 
children, not only that the race might be continued, but also that bodies might be 
supplied by parents devoted to the ideal of the religious or philosophic life, so that 
advanced souls might find birth in favourable conditions, and so the Order be 
continued. 

This also is the ancient rule laid down by the Manu of the Aryan Hindus in the 
Mdnava Dharma Shastra. The duties of the householder station of life (Grihastha 
ashrama) must first be performed, before the parents can retire to the 
contemplative life (Vanaprastha ashrama). In special cases, however, exceptions 
could be made. 

It may then be that Asclepius stands for those pupils who were still living the 
married life. 

The scribe of the thirteenth century, Codex B. (Parisinus, 1220), has laconically 
written on the margin of this paragraph the single word “nonsense” (cpkuapicc); he 
was presumably a monk. 


21 Cf. the expression, “God, Father and the Good,” C. H., x. (xi.) 1. 


-45 - 



• — / - » *■ ♦ 


CORPUS HERMETICUM III. (IV.) 

THE SACRED SERMON 

OF HERMES 

(Text: P. 31-33; Pat. 8b-9.) 


gl HE Glory of all things is God, Godhead and Godly 
Nature. Source of the things that are is God, who 
is both Mind and Nature, - yea Matter, the Wisdom that 
reveals all things. Source [too] is Godhead, - yea Nature, 
Energy, Necessity, and End, and Making-new- again 1 . 


Darkness that knew no bounds was in Abyss, and Water 
[too] and subde Breath intelligent; these were by Power of 
God in Chaos. 


Then Holy Light arose; and there collected ’neath Dry 
Space 2 3 from out Moist Essence Elements; and all the 
Gods do separate things out from fecund Nature. 

2. All things being undefined and yet unwrought, the light 
things were assigned unto the height, the heavy ones had 
their foundations laid down underneath the moist part of 
Dry Space’, the universal things being bounded off by 
Fire and hanged in Breath to keep them up. 

And 4 Heaven was seen in seven circles; its Gods were 
visible in forms of stars with all their signs; while Nature 
had her members made articulate together with the Gods 
in her. And [Heaven’s] periphery revolved in cyclic course, 
borne on by Breath of God. 

3. And every God by his own proper power brought forth 
what was appointed him. Thus there arose four-footed 
beasts, and creeping things, and those that in the water 
dwell, and things with wings, and everything that beareth 


1 Cf. P. S. A., xxvi 2. 

2 Lit. “Sand”; this presumably refers to the Light, and would thus mean “within the area or sphere of Light” - that is 
to say, manifestation. The “Moist Essence” is apparently the Water of Chaos, or primal substance. 

3 ixp’ by appro; presumably the “Water” of space. The heavy things are apparently primasval or cosmic “Earth.” 

4 The emended text from here to the end of the first sentence of § 3 is given by R. 47, n. 1. 


- 46 - 



seed, and grass, and shoot of every flower, all having in 
themselves seed of again-becoming 3 . 

And they selected out 5 6 the births 7 of men for gnosis of the 
works of God and attestation of the energy of Nature; the 
multitude of men for lordship over all beneath the 
Heaven and gnosis of its blessings, that they might 
increase in increasing and multiply in multitude, and every 
soul infleshed by revolution of the Cyclic Gods, for 
observation of the marvels of the Heaven and Heaven’s 
Gods’ revolution, and of the works of God and energy of 
Nature, for tokens of its blessings, for gnosis of the power 
of God, that they might know the fates that follow good 
and evil [deeds] and learn the cunning work of all good 
arts. 

4. [Thus] there begins their living and their growing wise, 
according to the fate appointed by the revolution of the 
Cyclic Gods, and their deceasing for this end. 

And there shall be memorials mighty of their handiworks 
upon the earth, leaving dim trace behind when cycles are 
renewed. 

For every birth of flesh ensouled, and of the fruit of seed, 
and every handiwork, though it decay, shall of necessity 
renew itself, both by the renovation of the Gods and by 
the turning-round of Nature’s rhythmic wheel. 

For that whereas the Godhead is Nature’s ever-making- 
new- again the cosmic mixture, Nature herself is also co- 
established in that Godhead. 


Jl 

si 



/IN* 

4 '* * 




5 Or “reincarnation” (nciXiyyevea'uxQ). 

6 eaneQ[xoXdyo\)v. 

7 %a<; ysveasi?. 


- 47 - 



COMMENTARY 


TEXT AND TITLE 

The text seems to be very corrupt, and at one time I thought it incomplete; but it 
may very well end with the reference to the mighty deeds of the men of old. 

The title “Sacred Sermon” would lead us to expect something of a special nature, 
something that would constitute a basis of doctrine. For we hear of the “Sacred 
Sermon” of Orpheus, and of the “Sacred Sermon” of Pythagoras, and are told that 
they formed the most sacred deposits of these two mystic schools respectively, and 
were regarded with special reverence; they thus seem to have been looked upon in 
some fashion as containing the groundwork of these systems. 

And this is precisely what we find with our treatise; it is to a large extent a 
summary of the general ideas of the “Shepherd” cosmogony adapted to the needs 
of a simpler formularization. 

When, however, Reitzenstein (p. 193) refers to this treatise cursorily as the 
preaching of some prophet or other which has been transferred to Hermes by the 
Redactor of our Corpus, he suggests that we are dealing with a doctrine foreign to 
the cosmogonical ideas of the “Shepherd.” It is, indeed, true that if we compare the 
data of the two treatises together, detail by detail, we shall find strong 
contradictions; but the general “feel” of both is the same, the general atmosphere is 
identical. 


THE TRINITY 

Prefixed to the cosmogenesis is a formal theological prooem, the precise meaning 
of which escapes me because of its almost mnemonic nature; it is, indeed quite in 
sutra style. There appears, however, to be a distinct trinitarian^ idea lurking in the 
first sentence, the trinity consisting of God (6 ©sdq) and Godhead (to GbTov) and 
Nature (f] qumc)- The Glory or Power of all things is this Divine Trinity. The 
Source (or Beginning), the End and the Ever-renewing of all tilings are owing to 
this Triad. All three seem to be almost interchangeable terms. The Godhead is the 
Mind of God, Godly Nature is the Wisdom of God. Again, at the end of the 
sermon (§ 4) we are told that the Godhead (or that which is Divine) is “Nature’s 
ever-making-new-again the cosmic mixture.” Godhead in operation is Nature, 
while at the same time Nature is co-established in Godhead, and both are one in 
God, the Source of all. 

The cosmogenesis begins with the grandiose image: “Darkness that knew no 
bounds was in Abyss.” 

We have already, in commenting on “Darkness” in the “Poemandres” treatise, 
referred, in explanation, to a Gnostic tradition in which the Primal Elements appear 
as Water, Darkness, Abyss, and Chaos, and have given some reason for ascribing 
the form of this tradition to Egypt - that is, Archaic Egypt, a parallel tradition to 
the Sumerian, both derived from a still more Archaic source. 


8 Not, of course, in a technical Christian sense. 


- 48 - 



FROM THE SYSTEM OF THE NICOLAITANS 


If, now, we turn to Epiphanius (remembering that he picked up what he knew or 
thought he knew about the Gnostics in Egypt), we shall find that he has preserved 
from another Gnostic system an even more striking parallel with our text. 

The Bishop of Salamis is denouncing the Nicolai'tans 9 , who for him were the 
earliest Christian Gnostics, there being very numerous and various sects of them, 
all deriving from a certain Nicolaus, whom Epiphanius would have us believe to 
have been one of the first seven deacons of the Church. 

If, in reality, however, the Nicolai'tans = the Balaamites of early Talmudic 
Rabbinism 10 , then the original Nicolai'tans were the earliest Christians, for 
“Balaamites” was the Rabbinical by-name of the followers of Balaam (Bileam) = 
Jeschu, and Balaam = Nicolaos, in Hebrew and Greek respectively. 

Curiously enough, moreover, in the paragraph (§ 4) before the one from which 
we are going to quote, Epiphanius ascribes the use of the mystic words, “Kaulakau 
Kaulakau,” to the Nicolai'tans, words which we have, with high probability, shown 
in the chapter “Myth of Man in the Mysteries” (§ 16 J., end) to have been used by a 
Jewish Gnostic of the time of Philo, writing in an Egyptian environment, and 
dealing with the Man-tradition, which is one of the main elements of the 
“Poemandres” doctrine. All of which carries us back to the dawn of Christianity. 

Speaking, then, of these Nicolai'tans, Epiphanius writes (xxv. 5): 

“ Others of them, again, plaster together empty names, saying: There was Darkness 
and Abyss fodog) and Water; and Spirit in the midst of them made separation of 
them. ” 11 

Here we have precisely the same elements as in our text for the foundation of a 
cosmogonical representation. What precise relationship these various traditions 
may have had to one another we cannot say with any certainty; but what we can say 
is that the writer or writers of our treatise are dealing with a material common to 
themselves, to pre-Christian Jewish Gnosticism and the earliest forms of the 
Christian Gnosis. 


THE “BOOKS OF THE CHALDEANS” 

The sentence (in § 2), “All tilings being undefined and yet unwrought 
(axaxaaxsudccrToov)” is also to be noticed, and, together with the opening sentence 
of the cosmogony, compared with the LXX. version of Gen. i. 2: 

‘And the earth was invisible and as yet unwrought (axaraoxeuacnog), and 
Darkness was upon the Abyss, and the Spirit of God was borne upon the Water. ” 

Are we, then, to suppose that our Trismegistic writer based himself directly upon 
this famous “oracle” of Jewish Scripture? 

The Jewish Gnostics would doubtless do so in their commentaries; but the 
phenomena of the Christianized Jewish Gnostic systems persuade us rather that 
these Gnostic Jews did not derive their ideas directly from the text of their national 


9 A-dv. Har., xxv. 1-5. 

10 See D.J. L., p. 188, where this identification is worked out with some probability. 

11 Ed. Dindorf (Leipzig, 1859), ii. 35, 36. 


- 49 - 



Scripture, but from what we may call parallel traditions of an esoteric nature. We 
shall see later on, when treating of Zosimus, that there were translations of the 
Chaldasan sacred books in the Alexandrian Library, and we cannot but believe that 
the general ideas of Chaldean cosmogony were familiar to all the learned of the 
time. For Chaldasa and Egypt were regarded as the two most wisdom-loving 
nations of antiquity, the two most sacred lands. What wonder, then, that Chaldaean 
and Egyptian ideas should be blended together, and turned out into a “scientific” 
whole, by die spirit of Greek “philosophizing,” in our treatises? 

I would therefore conclude that both here, and in the repetition of the formula, 
“increase in increasing and multiply in multitude” (§ 3), from the “Poemandres” 
treatise (§ 18), the similarities are not due to direct plagiarism, but to the fact that 
such logoi were “in the air.” I would also suggest that the somewhat peculiar term 
axocmaxeoamoq was not original with the Greek Targum of Genesis, first made at 
Alexandria some 250 years B.C., but that it was rather taken from the theological 
and philosophical language of the day and used by the Hebrew translators; that, in 
brief, in the LXX. translation already we have to take into account the strong 
influence of the technology of Hellenistic theology. 

With regard to the whole of our treatise, I would suggest that we have the heads 
of topics which were to be subsequently explained and commented upon, rather 
than a didactic treatise setting forth a clear teaching. Like the proem, the 
cosmogenesis itself is straidy condensed, so condensed that the indications are too 
vague for us to form any clear mental picture of die process that is suggested. We 
have nothing but a series of headings that may have meant somediing very definite 
to the writer - may, in fact, have summed up for him a whole body of doctrine - 
but which for us, in our ignorance of detail, can have but little precise meaning. 

To add to our difficulties, the text, as we have already said, appears to be very 
faulty. It is very probable that owing to its original brevity, copyists and readers 
would be tempted to gloss it in the interests of what would appear to them greater 
clearness; these glosses creeping into the text later on would, since the gloss-makers 
did not know the original scheme, blurr rather than elucidate the mother-text - and 
hence our tears. 

The most striking doctrine in the exposition is that of Renewal or Making-new- 
again (avavsojmc). All animal and vegetable forms contain in themselves “the seed 
of again-becoming” (to oneo^a xfjc naXiyyeveaiaq). I do not think that this is 
intended simply to mean that the individual is continued in the species; for we read 
that “every birth of flesh ensouled . . . shall of necessity renew itself 
(avavsooOf]asTou).” The doctrine that is preached is, therefore, that of palingenesis or 
“re-incarnation”; the renewal on the karmic wheel of birth-and-death (quasojc 
xuxkou SvapiOjiiou dqopqpoc). 


THE “FLOOD” 

The last point to which we need call the reader’s attention is the sentence: “And 
there shall be memorials mighty of their handiworks upon the earth, leaving dim 
trace behind when cycles are renewed.” 


- 50 - 



The thought of the writer is evidently turned back towards the past, to a time 
when a mighty race, devoted to growth in wisdom, lived on earth and left great 
monuments of their wisdom in the work of their hands, dim traces of which were 
to be seen “in the renewal of the times.” This seems to me to be a clear reference 
to the general belief of the time (commonly, though erroneously, called Stoic) that 
there were alternate periods of destruction, by fire and water, and of renewal. In 
Egypt the common belief, as we have pointed out elsewhere, was that the last 
destruction had been by water and flood. Before this Flood our author believed 
there had been a mighty race of Egyptians, the race of the First Hermes, and that 
some dim traces of the mighty works of this bygone wisdom-loving civilization 
were still to be seen. 

I am, myself, strongly inclined to believe in this tradition; and I have sometimes 
speculated as to the possibility of there being buried beneath one or more of the 
pyramids the remains of some prehistoric buildings (perhaps also of pyramid- 
shape) that have survived the “Flood.” 


-51 - 



+- - » ' 

CORPUS HERMETICUM IV. (V.) 

THE CUP OR MONAD 

OF HERMES TO TAT 

(Text: P. 34-40; Pat. 26b-27.) 

1. Hermes. 


ITH Reason (Logos ) , not with hands, did the 
World-maker 1 make the universal World 2 3 ; so that 
thou thus shouldst think of Him as everywhere 
and ever-being, the Author of all things, and One and 
Only, who by His Will 1 all beings hath created. 



This Body of Him is a thing no man can touch, or see, or 
measure, a Body inextensible, like to no other frame. ’Tis 
neither Fire nor Water, Air nor Breath 4 ; yet all of them 
come from it 5 . Now being Good He willed to consecrate 
this [Body] to Himself alone, and set its Earth in order 
and adorn it 6 . 


2. So down [to Earth] He sent the Cosmos 7 of this Frame 
Divine 8 , - man, a life that cannot die, and yet a life that 
dies. And o’er [all other] lives and over Cosmos [too], did 
man excel by reason of the Reason (Logos) and the Mind. 
For contemplator of God’s works did man become; he 
marvelled and did strive to know their Author. 


3. Reason (Logos) indeed, O Tat, among all men hath He 
distributed, but Mind not yet; not that He grudgeth any, 
for grudging cometh not from Him 9 , but hath its place 
below, within the souls of men who have no Mind. 


1 6 8y]|Aiougy6<;. 

2 xov Ttavxa xoapov. 

3 0eX?]aig. 

4 Perhaps meaning fEther. 

5 Cf. C. H, xiii. (xiv.) 6. 

6 xoopfjoai, the whole is a play on the word xoapo? ( kosnios ) which means “order,” “ornament,” and “world.” I have 
tried to retain it in English by using both meanings. The three preceding sentences, from “This Body” onwards, are 
quoted by Stobaeus, Phys., I. ii. 30; G. i. 26; W. 38, 10 ff., under the heading “Of Hermes.” 

7 That is, “Order.” 

8 That is, the Body of God; the One Element. 

9 Cf. C. H, v. (vi.) 2. 


- 52 - 


Tat. Why then did God, O father, not on all bestow a 
share of Mind? 

Her. He willed, my son, to have it set up in the midst for 
souls, just as it were a prize. 

4. Tat. And where hath He had it set up? 

Her. 10 He tilled a mighty Cup 11 with it, and sent it down, 
joining a Herald [to it], to whom He gave command to 
make this proclamation to the hearts of men: Baptize 12 
thyself with this Cup’s baptism, what heart can do so, 
thou that hast faith thou canst ascend to Him that hath 
sent down the Cup, thou that dost know for what thou 
didst come into being! 

As many then as understood the Herald’s tidings and 
doused themselves in Mind, became partakers in the 
Gnosis; and when they had “received the Mind” they were 
made “perfect men.” 

But they who do not understand the tidings, these, since 
they possess the aid of Reason [only] and not Mind, are 
ignorant wherefor they have come into being and 
whereby. 

5. The senses of such men are like irrational creatures’; 
and as their [whole] make-up is in their feelings and their 
impulses 1 ’, they fail in all appreciation of 14 those things 
which really are worth contemplation. These centre all 
their thought upon the pleasures of the body and its 
appetites, in the belief that for its sake man hath come 
into being. 

But they who have received some portion of God’s gift 1 ’, 
these. Tat, if we judge by their deeds, have from Death’s 
bonds won their release; for they embrace in their own 
Mind all things, things on the earth, things in the heaven, 
and things above the heaven, - if there be aught 16 . And 


10 A critical text of most of these two paragraphs is given, R. 214, n. 1. 

11 xgaifipa, lit. a crater or mixing-bowl. 

12 The meaning of this term is not to “sprinkle” with water, but to “plunge the whole body” into water. 

13 Kcd ev 6uft(p Kcd ev ogYU Tl 1 v K Q & a tv exovts?. 

14 Lit. “they do not wonder at.” 

15 Sc. the Mind. 

16 Cf. C. H. xi. (xii.) 19: “And contemplate what is beyond - if there be aught beyond the Cosmos.” 


- 53 - 



having raised themselves so far they sight the Good; and 
having sighted It, they look upon their sojourn here as a 
mischance; and in disdain of all, both things in body and 
the bodiless, they speed their way unto that One and Only 
One. 

6. This is, O Tat, the Gnosis of the Mind, Vision of things 
Divine; God-knowledge is it, for the Cup is God’s. 

Tat. Father, I, too, would be baptized. 

Her. Unless thou first shalt hate thy Body, son, thou canst 
not love thy Self. But if thou lov’st thy Self thou shalt 
have Mind, and having Mind thou shalt share in the 
Gnosis. 

Tat. Father, what dost thou mean? 

Her. It is not possible, my son, to give thyself to both, - I 
mean to things that perish and to things divine. For seeing 
that existing things are twain. Body and Bodiless, in which 
the perishing and the divine are understood, the man who 
hath the will to choose is left the choice of one or other; 
for it can never be the twain should meet. And in those 
souls to whom the choice is left, the waning of the one 
causes the other’s growth to show itself. 

7. Now the choosing of the Better not only proves a lot 
most fair for him who makes the choice, seeing it makes 
the man a God, but also shows his piety to God. Whereas 
the [choosing] of the Worse, although it doth destroy the 
“man,” it only doth disturb God’s harmony to this extent, 
that as processions pass by in the middle of the way, 
without being able to do anything but take the road from 
others, so do such men move in procession through the 
world led by their bodies’ pleasures 17 . 

8. This being so, O Tat, what comes from God hath been 
and will be ours; but that which is dependent on 
ourselves, let this press onward and have no delay; for ’tis 
not God, ’tis we who are the cause of evil things, 
preferring them to good. 


17 Critical text of simile is also given by R. 102, n. 2. Quoted by Zosimus in § “On the Anthropos Doctrine.” 


- 54 - 



Thou see’st, son, how many are the bodies through which 
we have to pass, how many are the choirs of daimones, 
how vast the system of the star-courses 18 [through which 
our Path doth lie], to hasten to the One and Only God. 

For to the Good there is no other shore 19 ; It hath no 
bounds; It is without an end; and for Itself It is without 
beginning, too, though unto us it seemeth to have one - the 
Gnosis. 

9. Therefore to It Gnosis is no beginning; rather is it [that 
Gnosis doth afford] to us the first beginning of Its being 
known. 

Let us lay hold, therefore, of the beginning, and quickly 
speed through all [we have to pass]. 

’T'is very hard, to leave the things we have grown used to, 
which meet our gaze on every side, and turn ourselves 
back to the Old Old [Path] . 

Appearances delight us, whereas things which appear not 
make their believing hard. 

Now evils are the more apparent things, whereas the 
Good can never show Itself unto the eyes, for It hath 
neither form nor figure. 

Therefore the Good is like Itself alone, and unlike all 
things else; for ’tis impossible that That which hath no 
body should make Itself apparent to a body. 

10. The “Like’s” superiority to the “Unlike “and the 
“Unlike’s” 2 " inferiority unto the “Like” consists in this: 

The Oneness 21 being Source 22 and Root of all, is in all 
things as Root and Source. Without [this] Source is 
naught; whereas the Source [Itself] is from naught but 
Itself, since It is Source of all the rest. It is Itself Its 
Source, since It may have no other Source. 


18 Kcd auvs^siav nod Spopou? aaxsgwv, the Septenary Spheres or “Cyclic Gods”; for the aus^eia (lit. continuity) is 
evidently the same as the appovia, Harmony, Concord, System. 

19 a8ia(3atov, - lit. not to be crossed, not to be forded. 

20 Reading with B., ton avopoiou. 

21 pova?, - the Monad, that is the Good. 

22 Or, Beginning. 


- 55 - 



The Oneness then being Source, containeth every 
number, but is contained by none; engendereth every 
number, but is engendered by no other one. 

11. Now all that is engendered is imperfect, it is divisible, 
to increase subject and to decrease; but with the Perfect 
[One] none of these things doth hold. Now that which is 
increasable increases from the Oneness, but succumbs 
through its own feebleness when it no longer can contain 
the One. 

And now, O Tat, God’s Image 2 ’ hath been sketched for 
thee, as far as it can be 24 ; and if thou wilt attentively dwell 
on it and observe it with thy heart’s eyes, believe me, son, 
thou’lt find the Path that leads above; nay, that Image 
shall become thy Guide 2 ’ itself, because the Sight [Divine] 
hath this peculiar [charm], it holdeth fast and draweth 
unto it those who succeed in opening their eyes, just as, 
they say, the magnet [draweth] iron 26 . 



COMMENTARY 


THE TITLE 

This beautiful little treatise, in which the great principles of the Gnosis are set 
forth so clearly and lucidly by the philosopher-mystic who penned it so many 
centuries ago, bears a double, or rather a triple, title: “Of Hermes to Tat: The Cup 
or Monad [or Oneness].” 2 The double title, however, is but a choice of names, for 
The Cup is The Oneness, - The One Element 28 , the “Body” of God, which is the 
Cause of all bodies and yet itself is bodiless; in other words, the Monad is the 
Intelligible Cosmos itself, God’s Image, elsewhere called His Alone-begotten Son. 

That this idea of a Cup or Mixing-bowl (Crater), in the symbolic sense of an all- 
containing receptacle, in which all the elements were blended together, and in the 
metaphysical sense of a transcendent Unity, the source of all things measurable and 


23 The Universal Cosmos or Monad. 

24 The above sentences, beginning with “The Oneness,” second paragraph of § 10, are quoted by Stobseus, Phjs., I. x. 
15; G. pp. 116, 117; W. 127, 6 ff .; under the heading, “Of Hermes.” 

25 Cf. C. H., vii. (viii.) 2; ix. (x.) 10; x. (xi.) 21; R. 23, n. 5. 

26 This simile is also used in the Naassene Document, and in Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris, where I have noticed it. 

27 See R. 193. Unfortunately, though he twice quotes from our treatise, Stoba:us adds nothing to our knowledge of 
the title, since he prefixes his extracts with the simple heading, “Of Hermes.” 

28 Which is to be equated, I believe, “meta-physically” with the Quintessence or Hither. 


- 56 - 



numberable, was one of the main doctrines of the Trismegistic tradition, is plain 
from the Pcemandrist Zosimus, who refers especially to this Cup as the symbol of 
Spiritual Baptism - that is, the plunging of the whole nature into the Great Ocean 
of Spirit or Mind, so that the man becomes irradiate with Life and illumined with 
Light. 

For a consideration of this Crater or Cup symbolism I must refer the reader to 
the chapter so entitled in the “Prolegomena”; it there being shown that in all 
probability it was transmitted along the Orphic line of tradition, though doubtless 
the Egyptian had some similar ideas. 

Our treatise should be read in the closest connection with C. H., xi. (xii.), “The 
Mind to Hermes,” which is its “esoteric” counterpart. What is here set forth for 
Tat by Hermes is there imparted to Hermes by the Mind; what is here set forth for 
the probationer or “hearer” is there set forth for the advanced disciple or “seer”; 
or, to use Mystery terms, what is here told to the Mystes is there revealed to the 
Epopt. Thus, then, the Tat-instruction begins. 

THE BAPTISM OF THE MIND 

1 . All things are made by Reason, the Formative Energy of the Mind. The Ideal 
Cosmos, or World-Order, is the Divine Body. 

2. Earth is the sensible Cosmos; on Earth man, the image of the Image, or 
Reason, of God rules. The purpose of man is thus to become the contemplator 
(0saxf]q) of the works of God; it is by the “wonder” aroused in him by the sight of 
these marvels that he will rise eventually into a knowledge of God Himself. This 
“wonder” is, then, the beginning of the True Philosophy or God-knowledge (fj top 
0s ov xaxavbr\oiq) . 

3. All men have in them “reason” (the ray of the Reason or Logos), but as yet 
few have “Mind.” This “mind” is the true Son of Mind, it is the real man, the 
perfect man, self-conscious of his Self. This true Self-consciousness is the prize set 
up for souls to win: the crown of humanity, the Christ-state (or, at any rate, the 
super-man or true man state). 

The Christ-Baptism is the plunging of the whole nature into the Mind-filled Cup, 
- the Pleroma of the Divine Being whose Body and Mind are one, - for is not the 
Cup the Body of God, “consecrated unto Himself alone” (§ 1), the Universal Body 
of all tilings? 


THE HOLY GRAIL 

It would be fascinating to speculate on what connection this Cup of Initiation 
may have had with the Mystic Eucharist, and the Original of the later Grail- 
tradition, which a great master of music and song has in our days made to live again 
in undying melody, and so restored it to its more universal significance. How 
Wagner sensed the marvel of the wondrous Vision with a poet’s intuition may be 
seen from his own words: 

“To the enraptured ga^e of one longing for celestial love, the clear blue atmosphere 
of heaven seems at first to condense itself into a wonderful, scarcely perceptible, but 


- 57 - 



daringly beautiful Vision. Then with gradually increasing precision the wonder- 
working angelic host is delineated in infinitely delicate outlines, as, conveying the holy 
vessel in its midst, it insensibly descends from the Maying heights of heaven. As the 
vision grows more and more distinct, ... the heart throbs with the pain of ecstasy ; . . . 
and when at last the Grail shows itself in the marvel of undraped reality, ... the 
beholder’s brain reels - he falls down in a state of adoring annihilation. . . . With 
chaste rejoicing the angelic host then returns to the heavenly height, fading away into 
the nothingness whence it first emanated. ” 

But for the Seers of the Gnosis there was a more intimate realization, for they 
were bidden to cast aside all hesitation and fearlessly to plunge themselves into the 
very Cup Itself, the Ocean of Divine Love and Wisdom. 

This was the Proclamation or Preaching (x^puygcc), or Good Tidings, of the 
Herald of God to men, to those who had the Living Faith they could “ascend to 
Him who had sent down the Cup,” God’s Greatest Gift. 

By such a Baptism as this, not by a symbolic sprinkling with water, is it that man 
is to be redeemed. This is the consummation of man’s earthly pilgrimage, the 
realization of the “Gnosis of the Mind, Vision of tilings Divine; God-knowledge is 
it; for the Cup is God’s.” 


THE “HATING OF THE BODY” 

6. In § 6 we have given us a discipline of the mystic way, the “hating of the 
body,” which is by no means to be taken literally. 

A misunderstanding of this discipline led many of the mystics of the time (and, 
for a matter of that, has led most of the mystics of all time) to the false belief that 
the body (or matter generally) was the source of evil. Hence we have all the 
mortifications and chastisements of the flesh which the monkish spirit introduced 
into Christendom, and which persist in some quarters even to our own day. Against 
this the Common Sense of Christianity as a general religion, basing itself on the 
general utterances of the Christ, has ever protested. 

Our mystic philosopher, in urging his disciples to hate the body, apparently does 
so because they are in the first stages of awakening, and so far have not got the 
“Mind” active in them. 

In taking the first steps there must be developed a consciousness of the strong 
antithesis of good and evil, of love and hate, in order that the will of the disciple 
may be strengthened towards the good and weakened towards the bad. 

When, however, his will is balanced between the two, when he as easily wills good 
as evil, then, and not till then, is he prepared to learn the further great lesson: that 
real wisdom consists in balance, in the Middle Way; that nothing is evil in itself - 
the Body is as honourable in its own sphere, as absolutely necessary and 
indispensable, as is the Mind in its. 

He learns the great secret that to have one’s thoughts always in heaven is as 
erroneous as to have them always on earth; that there is a higher mode of existence, 
when the things of heaven and earth are within each other, and not apart. 


- 58 - 



As the Introduction to The Book of the Great Logos according to the Mystery 
has it: 

“Jesus saith: Blessed is the man who knoweth this Word (Logos), and hath 
brought down the Leaven and home up the Earth and raised it Heavenwards. ” 29 

Heaven and Earth must kiss each odier for this consummation, this truly Sacred 
Marriage. 

And yet in the third Synoptic (xvi. 25, 26) we read: 

“Jesus saith: If any man come unto Me, and hate not his father, and mother, and 
wife, and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own soul also, he cannot be 
My disciple. ” 

Here we have precisely the same word “hate” ([xtasT) as in our text. That, 
however, this “dark saying” was interpreted in a mystical sense by Gnostic 
tradition, as by no means referring to physical parents but to the past causes of our 
imperfections 30 , 1 have already pointed out on several occasions’ 1 ; we may therefore 
conclude that in a gnostic teaching, such as is our treatise, the terms “hate” and 
“body” are not to be literally interpreted. 

8. And that this is so may be seen from the declaration in § 8: “For ’tis not God, 
’tis we who are the cause of evil tilings, preferring them to good”; - where the cause 
of evil is not assigned to the body but to man’s own choice. And finally, to clinch 
our contention, we would refer the reader to the Sermon to Asclepius, C. H., vi. 
(vii.) 6: 

“Such are the things that men call good and beautiful, Asclepius - things which we 
cannot flee or hate. ” 


THE GNOSIS AND ITS BLESSINGS 

9. In § 9 we have to notice the phrase: “Therefore to It Gnosis is no beginning; 
rather is it that Gnosis doth afford to us the first beginning of Its being known ”; and 
compare it with the logos quoted by the Jewish commentator in the Naassene 
Document (§ 25): “The Beginning of Perfection is Gnosis of Man, but Gnosis of 
God is Perfect Perfection.” 

The claim for the Gnosis is therefore a modest one. The Gnosis is not an end in 
itself; it is but the beginning of the True Knowledge of God. They who receive the 
Baptism of the Mind are made “perfect men,” not Perfect; not until they have 
received this touch of the Christ-consciousness have they reached true manhood. 

Those who have received this Baptism know why they have come into being, - 
the purpose of life. They become consciously immortal; they know they are 
deathless, they do not only believe it; their immortality is no longer a belief it is a fact 
of knowledge. 

They have won their freedom from Death and Fate, and know the real 
constitution of the cosmos up to the Threshold of the Good, the Plain of Truth - 


29 Codex Brucianus; see F. F. F., p. 520. 

30 Cf. the Pistis Sophia, 341-343, where the text is given as: “He who shall not leave father and mother to follow after 
Me is not worthy of Me,” and explained by the Saviour to mean: “Ye shall leave your Parents the Rulers, that ye may 
be Children of the First Everlasting Mystery.” 

31 See, for instance, Extracts from the “Vdhan” (London, 1904), pp. 374-376. 


- 59 - 



that is to say, presumably in Buddhist terms, as far as the Nirvanic state of 
consciousness. Not yet, however, have they entered Nirvana that is to say, become 
one with the Logos. They have seen the Sight or Vision of Nirvana, but not 
entered into the Promised Land, that “Blessed Space,” which, as Basilides tells us, 
“can neither be conceived of nor characterized by any word.” 12 

The Vision is an earnest of what they may be. They have become Gods, it is 
true, already, or, in other words, enjoy the same freedom and consciousness as the 
Gods or Angels, but there is a still more transcendent state, when they will be at- 
oned with Deity Himself. 


THE ANCIENT PATH 

Hard as it is to leave the “tilings we have grown used to,” the things habitual, it 
must be done if we are to enter into the Way of the Gnosis. But no new Padi is 
this, no going forth into new lands (though it may have all the appearance of being 
so). The entrance on the Path of the Gnosis is a Going-Home, it is a Return - a 
Turning-Back (a True Repentance). “We must turn ourselves back unto the Old 
Old Way” (id Tiakaid xai dpyaia). 

And for the followers of the Doctrine of Thrice-greatest Hermes, this Old Old 
Path could have meant nothing but the Archaic Wisdom of Ancient Egypt. The 
Wisdom of Egypt was thus the Gnosis. 


32 See F. F. F, p. 261. 


- 60 - 



+- - ♦ 

CORPUS HERMETICUM V. (VI.) 

THOUGH UNMANIFEST GOD IS MOST MANIFEST 

OF HERMES TO HIS SON TAT 

(Text: P. 41-48; Pat. 12b-13b.) 

1 . 


WILL recount for thee this sermon (logos) too, O 
Tat, that thou may’st cease to be without the 
mysteries of the God beyond all name 1 . And 
mark thou well how That which to the many seems 
unmanifest, will grow most manifest for thee. 



Now were It manifest, It would not be. For all that is 
made manifest is subject to becoming, for it hath been made 
manifest. But the Unmanifest for ever is, for It doth not 
desire to be made manifest. It ever is, and maketh 
manifest all other things. 


Being Himself unmanifest, as ever being and ever making- 
manifest, Himself is not made manifest. God is not made 
Himself; by thinking-manifest 2 3 , He thinketh all things 
manifest. 


Now “thinking-manifest” deals with things made alone, 
for thinking-manifest is nothing else than making. 

2. He, then, alone who is not made, ’tis clear, is both 
beyond all power of thinking-manifest, and is unmanifest. 

And as He thinketh all things manifest, He manifests 
through all things and in all, and most of all in whatsoever 
things He wills to manifest. 

Do thou, then, Tat, my son, pray first unto our Lord and 
Father, the One-and-Only One, from whom the One’ 
doth come, to show His mercy unto thee, in order that 
thou mayest have the power to catch a thought of this so 
mighty God, one single beam of Him to shine into thy 


1 Cf. § 8 end, and § 9 beginning. 

2 £v tpavxocaia - that is to say, by thinking into manifestation. 

3 Presumably the Manifested God; the One-and-Only One being the Unmanifested, the God beyond all name. 


-61 - 



thinking. For thought alone “sees” the Unmanifest, in that 
it is itself unmanifest. 

If, then, thou hast the power, He will, Tat, manifest to thy 
mind’s eyes. The Lord begrudgeth not Himself to 
anything, but manifests Himself through the whole world. 

Thou hast the power of taking thought, of seeing it and 
grasping it in thy own “hands,” and gazing face to face 
upon God’s Image 4 . But if what is within thee even is 
unmanifest to thee, how, then, shall He Himself who is 
within thy self be manifest for thee by means of [outer] 
eyes? 

3. But if thou wouldst “see” Him, bethink thee of the sun, 
bethink thee of moon’s course, bethink thee of the order 
of the stars. Who is the One who watcheth o’er that 
order? For every order hath its boundaries marked out by 
place and number. 

The sun’s the greatest god of gods in heaven; to whom all 
of the heavenly gods give place as unto king and master. 
And he, this so-great one, he greater than the earth and 
sea, endures to have above him circling smaller stars than 
him. Out of respect to Whom, or out of fear of Whom, 
my son, [doth he do this]? 

Nor like nor equal is the course each of these stars 
describes in heaven. Who [then] is He who marketh out 
the manner of their course and its extent? 

4. The Bear up there that turneth round itself, and carries 
round the whole cosmos with it - Who is the owner of 
this instrument? Who He who hath set round the sea its 
bounds? Who He who hath set on its seat the earth? 

For, Tat, there is someone who is the Maker and the Lord 
of all these things. It could not be that number, place and 
measure could be kept without someone to make them. 
No order whatsoever could be made by that which lacketh 
place and lacketh measure; nay, even this ' is not without a 
lord, my son. For if the orderless lacks something, in that 


4 The Intelligible Cosmos. 

5 Namely, that which lacketh place, number, and order; that is, disorder, chaos. 


- 62 - 



it is not lord of order’s path, it also is beneath a lord - the 
one who hath not yet ordained it order. 

5. Would it were possible for thee to get thee wings, and 
soar into the air, and, poised midway ’tween earth and 
heaven, behold the earth’s solidity, the sea’s fluidity (the 
flowings of its streams), the spaciousness of air, fire’s 
swiftness, [and] the coursing of the stars, the swiftness of 
heaven’s circuit round them [all] ! 

Most blessed sight were it, my son, to see all these 
beneath one sway - the motionless in motion, and the 
unmanifest made manifest; whereby is made this order of 
the cosmos and the cosmos which we see of order. 

6. If thou would’st see Him too through things that suffer 
death 6 , both on the earth and in the deep 7 , think of a 
man’s being fashioned in the womb, my son, and strictly 
scrutinize the art of Him who fashions him, and learn 
who fashioneth this fair and godly image of the Man 8 . 

Who [then] is He who traceth out the circles of the eyes; 
who He who boreth out the nostrils and the ears; who He 
who openeth [the portal of] the mouth; who He who doth 
stretch out and tie the nerves; who He who channels out 
the veins; who He who hardeneth the bones; who He who 
covereth the flesh with skin; who He who separates the 
fingers and the joints; who He who widens out a treading 
for the feet; who He who diggeth out the ducts; who He 
who spreadeth out the spleen; who He who shapeth heart 
like to a pyramid; who He who setteth ribs together; who 
He who wideneth the liver out; who He who maketh 
lungs like to a sponge; who He who maketh belly stretch 
so much; who He who doth make prominent the parts 
most honourable, so that they may be seen, while hiding 
out of sight those of least honour? 

7. Behold how many arts [employed] on one material, how 
many labours on one single sketch; and all exceeding fair, 


6 As opposed to the immortal world-order. 

7 Cf. § 9 below, where it almost seems to mean “water.” 

8 The Heavenly Man of “The Shepherd” treatise; man is the image of The Man, the Logos or Image of God. This 
and the following passage is referred to by Lactantius, D. Institt., ii. 10. 


- 63 - 



and all in perfect measure, yet all diversified! Who made 
them all? What mother, or what sire, save God alone, 
unmanifest, who hath made all things by His Will? 

8. And no one saith a statue or a picture comes to be 
without a sculptor or [without] a painter; doth [then] such 
workmanship as this exist without a Worker? What depth 
of blindness, what deep impiety, what depth of ignorance! 
See, [then] thou ne’er, son Tat, deprivest works of 
Worker! 

Nay, rather is He greater than all names, so great is He, 
the Father of them all 9 . For verily He is the Only One; 
and this His work, to be a father. 

9. So, if thou forcest me somewhat too bold, to speak, His 
being is conceiving of all things and making [them] 10 . 

And as without its maker it is impossible that anything 
should be, so ever is He not unless He ever makes all 
things, in heaven, in air, in earth, in deep, in all of cosmos, 
in every part that is and that is not of everything. For 
there is naught in all the world that is not He. 

He is Himself, both things that are and things that are not. 
The things that are He hath made manifest, He keepeth 
things that are not in Himself. 

10. He is the God beyond all name; He the unmanifest, 
He the most manifest; He whom the mind [alone] can 
contemplate, He visible unto the eyes [as well]; He is the 
one of no body, the one of many bodies, nay, rather He of 
every body. 

Naught is there which He is not. For all are He and He is 
all 11 . And for this cause hath He all names, in that they are 
one Father’s. And for this cause hath He Himself no 
name, in that He’s Father of [them] all 12 . 

Who, then, may sing Thee praise of Thee, or [praise] to 
Thee? 


9 The translation of this sentence is conjectural; for the text is not only corrupt, but there appears to be a lacuna in it. 

10 The male and female energies of the Divine Parent. 

11 For emended reading, see R. 244. 

12 That is, of all names. For the following, cf. P. S. A., xxxi. 3. 


- 64 - 



Whither . , again, am I to turn my eyes to sing Thy praise; 
above, below, within, without? 

There is no way, no place [is there] about Thee, nor any 
other thing of things that are. 

All [are] in Thee; all [are] from Thee, O Thou who givest 
all and takest naught, for Thou hast all and naught is there 
Thou hast not. 

11. And when, O Father, shall I hymn Thee? For none can 
seize Thy hour or time. 

For what . , again, shall I sing hymn? For things that Thou 
hast made, or things Thou hast not? For things Thou hast 
made manifest, or things Thou hast concealed? 

How 13 , further, shall I hymn Thee? As being of myself? As 
having something of mine own? As being other? 

For that Thou art whatever I may be; Thou art whatever I 
may do; Thou art whatever I may speak. 

For Thou art all, and there is nothing else which Thou art 
not. Thou art all that which doth exist, and Thou art what 
doth not exist, - Mind when Thou thinkest, and Father 
when Thou makest, and God when Thou dost energize, 
and Good and Maker of all things. 

(For that the subtler part of matter is the air, of air the 
soul, of soul the mind, and of mind God.) 


si 



T ' 




COMMENTARY 


THE TITLE 

The redactor of our Corpus must have taken this sermon from some collection 
of “Those to Tat,” for it begins “xcd xovde not xov Xoyov.” One other sermon at 
least, then, must have preceded it; but whether it was our C. H., iv. (v.), “The Cup,” 
or the lost C. H. (ii.), “The General Sermon,” it is impossible to say. 


13 Text from here on given in R. 68, n. 4. 


- 65 - 



The sermon bears no title proper, and the enunciation of the subject, which 
stands in its place, is derived from the second sentence of the treatise itself, and has 
plainly been superscribed by some later Byzantine editor. 

MAYA 

The opening paragraphs of this fine tractate are very difficult to render into 
English in any way that can preserve the subtle shades of meaning of the Greek. As 
this subtle word-play has been entirely missed by all previous translators, I have 
made a rough attempt to preserve it by using the somewhat clumsy term 
“manifest.” The word-play in Greek may be seen from the following list of the 
original terms taken in the order of their occurrence: dqavdc, cpavsQwxaxov, Cpqavsc, 
cpouvopsvov, ecpavT], atpocvsq, cpavfjvcu, pavsqa, atpocvrjq, tpavsqcov, tpocvepauxoa, 
cpavxaaia, pavxaaicov, cpccvxaaia, dpavxocaiaaxoq xal a tpavf]?, pavxaaicov, cpalvexou, 
cpavfjvcu. These all occur in § 1 and the first two lines of § 2. 

I have translated cpccvxaaicc by “thinking-manifest,” seeing that it is the power by 
which an object is made apparent or manifest. The doctrine is die same as that of 
the Vedanta philosophy, the Maya of the Vedantavadins. Maya is generally 
translated “illusion,” but this is not a good equivalent, for it comes from the root 
ma, to make or measure. The Logos is called in the Vedanta, Mayin (masc.), the 
Maker, Measurer, or Creator, and His Power, or Shakti, is Maya (fern.). It is the 
Power of the Divine Thought, and so far from being illusion in any ordinary sense 
of the word, is very real for us, and is only non-real as compared to the Logos 
Himself, the One Reality in the highest philosophical sense of the term. 

The idea is magnificently summed up for us in a logos of Phosilampes 14 , quoted 
by the redactor of the Untitled Apocalypse of the Codex Brucianus, which runs as 
follows: 

‘Through Him is that-which-really-is and that-which-really-is-not, 
through which the Hidden-which-really-is and the Manifest-which-really-is- 
not exists. ” 

Also compare Hippolytus’ summary of the “Simonian” Gnosis: 

“Of this Twofold Nature he calls the one side the Hidden and the other 
the Manifest, saying that the concealed [parts] of the Fire are hidden in the 
manifest, and the manifest produced by the concealed. . . . 

“And the manifest side of the Fire has all things in itself which a man 
can perceive of things visible, or which he unconsciously fails to perceive. 
Whereas the hidden side is everything that we can conceive as intelligible, . . 

. o r which a man fails to conceive. ” 15 

2. ‘The Ford begrudgeth not Himself to any thing. ” 


14 Perhaps a by-name of Basilides; see F. F. F, p. 554. 

15 Hipp., Philos., vi. 9; see my Simon Magus (London, 1892), p. 13. 


- 66 - 



Compare this with C. H., iv. (v.) 3: 

‘Not that He grudgeth any, for grudging cometh not from Him”; and 
compare both with the saying of Plato in the Timceus (29 E): 

‘He was Good, and to the Good there can never at any time be any 
grudging of aught. ” 

THE HIGHER PANTHEISM OR PANMONISM 

10. With the soul-satisfying pantheism of § 10 we may with interest compare the 
address to the Logos in The Martyrdom of Peter, which still retains many Gnostic 
elements. 

‘Thou that art to be understood by pint alone! Thou art my father, Thou my 
mother, Thou >ny brother, Thou my friend, Thou my servant, Thou my master. Thou 
art the all, and all is in Thee. Yea, all that is, is Thou; and there is nothing else that 
is but Thee alone!” 16 


HYMN TO ALL-GOD 

The treatise ends with one of the most magnificent Hymns to God ever written 
in any language - a hymn which some foolish copyist has spoilt by tagging on to it 
the gloss of a reader noted on the margin of the MS. from which our scribe copied. 

With the sentence: “All are in Thee, all are from Thee,” compare the Naassene 
Hymn (quoted in Hippolytus’ Introduction, in “The Myth of Man”): 

‘“From Thee’ is Father, and ‘Through Thee, ’Mother, - the two Immortal Names, 
Parents of JFons, 0 Thou who hast the Heaven for Thy City, 0 Man of Mighty 
Names!” 


16 Lipsius (R. A.) and Bonnet (M.), Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha (Leipzig, 1891), i. 98. 


- 67 - 



+- - » 

CORPUS HERMETICUM VI. (VII.) 

IN GOD ALONE IS GOOD AND ELSEWHERE NOWHERE 

(T ext: P. 48-53; Pat. 14a-15a.) 

1 . 

OOD, O Asclepius, is in none else save God 
alone; nay, rather, Good is God Himself 
eternally. 

If it be so, [Good] must be essence, from every kind of 
motion and becoming free (though naught is free from It), 
possessed of stable energy around Itself, never too little, 
nor too much, an ever-full supply. [Though] one, yet [is It] 
source of all; for what supplieth all is Good. When I, 
moreover, say [supplieth] altogether [all], it is for ever Good. 
But this belongs to no one else save God alone. 

For He stands not in need of any thing, so that desiring it 
He should be bad; nor can a single thing of things that are 
be lost to Him, on losing which He should be pained; for 
pain is part of bad. 

Nor is there aught superior to Him, that He should be 
subdued by it; nor any peer to Him to do Him wrong, or 
[so that] He should fall in love on its account; nor aught 
that gives no ear to Him, whereat He should grow angry; 
nor wiser aught, for Him to envy. 

2. Now as all these are non-existent in His being, what is 
there left but Good alone? 

For just as naught of bad is to be found in such 
transcendent Being, so too in no one of the rest will Good 
be found. 

For in them all are all the other things 1 - both in the litde 
and the great, both in each severally and in this living one 2 
that’s greater than them all and mightiest [of them]. 



1 That is, things not Good. 

2 Or animal; that is, cosmos as a single life or living creature. 


- 68 - 


For things subject to birth 1 abound in passions, birth in 
itself being passible. But where there’s passion, nowhere is 
there Good; and where is Good, nowhere a single passion. 
For where is day, nowhere is night; and where is night, 
day is nowhere. 

Wherefore in genesis the Good can never be, but only be 
in the ingenerate. 

But seeing that the sharing in all things hath been 
bestowed on matter, so doth it share in Good. 

In this way is the Cosmos good; that, in so far as it doth 
make all things, as far as making goes it’s Good, but in all 
other things it is not Good. For it’s both passible and 
subject unto motion, and maker of things passible. 

3. Whereas in man by greater or by less of bad is good 
determined. For what is not too bad down here, is good; 
and good down here is the least part of bad. 

It cannot, therefore, be that good down here should be 
quite clean of bad, for down here good is fouled with bad; 
and being fouled, it stays no longer good, and staying not 
it changes into bad. 

In God alone, is, therefore, Good, or rather Good is God 
Himself. 

So then, Asclepius, the name alone of Good is found in 
men, the thing itself nowhere [in them], for this can never 
be. 

For no material body doth contain It, - a thing 4 bound on 
all sides by bad, by labours, pains, desires and passions, by 
error and by foolish thoughts. 

And greatest ill of all, Asclepius, is that each of these 
things that have been said above, is thought down here to 
be the greatest good. 

And what is still an even greater ill, is belly-lust, the error 
that doth lead the band of all the other ills - the thing that 
makes us turn down here from Good. 


3 Or genesis. 

4 Jr. the body. 


- 69 - 



> o 


4. And I, for my own part, give thanks to God, that He 
hath cast it in my mind about the Gnosis of the Good, 
that it can never be It 5 should be in the world 6 . For that 
the world is “fullness” 7 of the bad, but God of Good, and 
Good of God. 

The excellencies of the Beautiful are round the very 
essence [of the Good]; nay, they do seem too pure, too 
unalloyed; perchance ’tis they that are themselves Its 
essences. 

For one may dare to say, Asclepius, - if essence, sooth, He 
have - God’s essence is the Beautiful; the Beautiful is 
further also Good. 

There is no Good that can be got from objects in the 
world. For all the things that fall beneath the eye are 
image-things and pictures as it were; while those that do 
not meet [the eye are the realities 8 ], especially the [essence] 
of the Beautiful and Good. 

Just as the eye cannot see God, so can it not behold the 
Beautiful and Good. For that they are integral parts of 
God, wedded to Him alone, inseparate familiars, most 
beloved, with whom God is Himself in love, or they with 
God. 

5. If thou canst God conceive, thou shalt conceive the 
Beautiful and Good, transcending Light, made lighter than 
the Light by God. That Beauty is beyond compare, 
inimitate that Good, e’en as God is Himself. 

As, then, thou dost conceive of God, conceive the 
Beautiful and Good. For they cannot be joined with aught 
of other things that live, since they can never be divorced 
from God. 

Seek’st thou for God, thou seekest for the Beautiful. One 
is the Path that leadeth unto It - Devotion joined with 
Gnosis. 


5 Sc. the Good. 

6 Cosmos. 

r pleroma. The “world” is the pleroma of evil, but ‘God” the pleroma of good, 

lacuna unfortunately occurs here in the text. 


- 70 - 



6. And thus it is that they who do not know and do not 
tread Devotion’s Path, do dare to call man beautiful and 
good, though he have ne’er e’en in his visions seen a whit 
that’s Good, but is enwrapped with every kind of bad, and 
thinks the bad is good, and thus doth make unceasing use 
of it, and even feareth that it should be ta’en from him, so 
straining every nerve not only to preserve but even to 
increase it. 

Such are the things that men call good and beautiful, 
Asclepius, - things which we cannot flee or hate; for 
hardest thing of all is that we’ve need of them and cannot 
live without them. 



COMMENTARY 


THE TITLE 

This sermon, which bears no proper title, but has been headed by some editor 
with the enunciation of the subject taken from the opening sentence of the treatise 
itself, belongs to the Asclepius-group. 

Reitzenstein (p. 194) thinks that this tractate and the previous Asclepius- 
Dialogue - C. H., ii. (hi.) - may very well have formed part of the same collection of 
Asclepiana. 


DUALISM? 

The teaching of our sermon is apparently dualistic; but is it not only formally so, 
and as an exercise to raise the thought of the pupil away from the “things he has 
grown used to”? For at the end Hermes declares: 

“Such are the things that men call good and beautiful, Asclepius - things which we 
cannot flee or hate\ for hardest thing of all is that we’ve need of them and cannot live 
without them.” 

This is a clear advance on the formal Tat-teaching as to “hating” the body given 
in C. H., iv. (v.) 6, and points clearly to an instruction in which the cosmos was not 
regarded as the pleroma of bad, in spite of the formal and emphatic statement in 
§ 4: 

“6 yag xoogog TiXrigoopid eon rfjg xax/ac. ” 

Moreover, if we turn to C. H., ix. (x.), 4 - another treatise of Hermes to 
Asclepius, and curiously enough having as superscription almost the same 
proposition as heads our present treatise we read: 


-71 - 



“ycofiov vhfj avrijc [xaxiafi i) yfj, ovy 6 xoopiog, cbc evioi no zb sgovai 
j3Xaa(p/]jUovvrsg. ” 

“Bad’s place is earth, and not the world, as some will sometimes say with impious 
tongue. ” 

Here we have a formal denial in an Asclepius -tractate of the formal proposition 
in our Asclepius-sermon. 

The cosmos is not evil; it is the beautiful world-order. Evil is a thing connected 
with the earth; there is no such thing as a 7iky]qoojjia of evil; evil has at best only a 
yojptov. They who say such tilings blaspheme. 

This is strong language, and there seems no other conclusion to be drawn from 
it but that there were various schools widiin the Trismegistic tradition, and that 
they wrangled dieologically together. 

Is it, however, possible that the Hermes of our treatise is only speaking 
metaphorically, so that he may intensify the ideal of the Good, and that he was 
subsequently taken as speaking literally? For he must have known that the Cosmos 
was regarded as the Son of God, par excellence , the fairest and best-beloved of all, 
God’s Very Image. 

On the other hand, we know that in the Trismegistic doctrine the “cosmic man” 
was opposed to the “essential man,” that, in fact, the term “cosmic” was used in 
the nomenclature of the time in a theological as well as in a philosophical sense. 
This was especially the case in Christianity. Many instances could be cited from the 
New Testament documents; and we have also a striking example of the use of 
“cosmos” in this sense in the second logion of the First Oxyrhynchus Fragment: 

“Jesus saith: Except ye fast to the world (rdv xoopiov), ye shall in no wise find the 
Kingdom of God. ” 

As, moreover, we nowhere else find mention of a “pleroma of evil,” we may 
permissibly conclude that it is here not intended to be taken literally, but only as a 
metaphorical expression. 


- 72 - 



GOD THE PLEROMA OF GOOD 


“God is the Pleroma of Good, and Good is the Pleroma of God. ” 

And so, speaking of die Triumphant Christ as the Cosmic Logos, Paul writes: 

“And Him hath He (God) given as Head over all things unto the Church 9 , which 
is His Body - the dullness ( Vleroma ) of Him who doth fulfil all things in all. ” 10 
The thought-atmosphere in which the idea of the “Church” as the Pleroma arose 
may be sampled from Philo, De Proem. etPcen., § xi. (M. ii. 418, p. 920; Ri. v. 232): 

“And thus the soul, becoming a Pleroma of virtues bj means of the three best 
[blessings] - nature, instruction (mathesis) and practice (askesis), - leaving no vacant 
spot in her for entrance of aught else, brings unto birth a pefect number, - her two 
hexads of sons, a miniature and copy of the circle of the types of life 11 , for the 
improvement of the things down here. 

“ This is the House 12 that naught can harm, the pefect and continual in the public 
scriptures, and also in the secret meanings of the mystic ones, - the House that won the 
priye, as I have said, of lordship o’er the tribes of its [own] race. ” 

“It was thus from this House in course of time, as it increased and became 
populous, that well-regulated cities were established, yea, disciplines of wisdom and of 
righteousness and holiness, in which the transmutation (psTa7ioir]oig) of the rest of 
virtue was sought out in manner worthy of so high a work. ” 

In the Trismegistic tradition, however, the idea is simpler, as we learn from “The 
Definitions of Asclepius,” C. H. (xvi.) 3: 

“For that the Fullness of all things is One and is in One, - this latter One not 
coming as a second One, but both being One. . . . 

‘For should one try to separate ivhat seems to be both All and One and Same 
from One, - he will be found to take his epithet of ‘All’ from the idea of multitude 
and not from that of fullness (pleroma ), - which is impossible; for if he put All for the 
One, he will destroy the All. ” 

Nevertheless, the Pleroma 11 of Life is more specially the Cosmos as the Son of 
God - that is, as the Logos. Thus in C. H., xii. (xiii.) 15, we read: 

“Matter is one; and the World-order (Cosmos), as a whole, - the Mighty God and 
Image of the Mightier One, both with Him unified, and the Conserver of the Will 
and Order of the Father, - is Fife’s Fullness (Pleroma). . . . 

‘How then, 0 son, could there be in the God, - the Image of the Father, the 
Plenitude (Pleroma) of Fife 14 , -dead things ?” 

And again in C. H., ix. (x.) 7: 

‘For [Cosmos] being a most wise Breath, bestows their qualities on bodies together 
with the one Pleroma - that of Fife. ” 


9 Trj EKK^aia, that is, the Spiritual Body of the “Elect.” 

10 Eph. i. 23. Cf. Col. ii. 19: “In Him dwelleth the whole Fullness of the Godhead as in a body.” 

11 Sc. the Zodiac. 

12 Sc. of God. 

13 Cf. John i. 16: “Of His Fullness we have all received, and grace on grace.” 

14 Cf. John i. 4: “In Him was Life and the Life was the Light of men.” 


- 73 - 



5. This Pleroma of God is die Good and Beautiful. The Path to this True Good 
is one of balance, - for it is the Way of Devotion united unto Gnosis - in Sanskrit 
terms, the Bhakti-Marga and Jnana-Marga combined 1 ". 

6. Finally we learn, though inferentially, that things are not bad in themselves; 
the evil is that men are content with the little goods they have and cling desperately 
to these, in ignorance of the greater blessings to which they could attain, did they 
but open their spiritual eyes for the True Vision of the Good. For even the psychic 
visions of the soul, in spite of their beauty, give man no hint of that Most Blessed 
Sight of All. 


15 Compare C. H., i. 27: “And I began to preach to men the beauty of Devotion and of Gnosis.” 


- 74 - 





CORPUS HERMETICUM VII. (VIII.) 

THE GREATEST ILL AMONG MEN IS IGNORANCE OF GOD 


1 . 


(T ext: P. 54, 55; Pat. 18a.) 



HITHER stumble ye, sots, who have sopped up 
the wine of ignorance unmixed, and can so far 
not carry it that ye already even spew it forth? 


Stay ye, be sober, gaze upwards with the [true] eyes of the 
heart! And if ye cannot all, yet ye at least who can! 


For that the ill of ignorance doth pour o’er all the earth 
and overwhelm the soul that’s battened down within the 
body, preventing it from fetching port within Salvation’s 
harbours. 


2. Be then not carried off by the fierce flood, but using the 
shore-current 1 , ye who can, make for Salvation’s port, and, 
harbouring there, seek ye for one to take you by the hand 
and lead you 2 unto Gnosis’ gates. 

Where shines clear Light, of every darkness clean; where 
not a single soul is drunk, but sober all they gaze with 
their hearts’ eyes on Him who willeth to be seen. 

No ear can hear Him, nor can eye see Him, nor tongue 
speak of Him, but [only] mind and heart. 

But first thou must tear off from thee the cloak which 
thou dost wear, - the web of ignorance, the ground of 
bad, corruption’s chain, the carapace of darkness, the 
living death, sensation’s corpse, the tomb thou earnest 
with thee, the robber in thy house, who through the 
things he loveth, hateth thee, and through the things he 
hateth, bears thee malice. 

3. Such is the hateful cloak thou wearest, - that throttles 
thee [and holds thee] down to it, in order that thou may’st 
not gaze above, and, having seen the Beauty of the Truth, 


1 Lit. back or up-current. 

2 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 11; ix. (x.) 10; x (xi.) 2; R. 23, n. 5. 


-75 - 


and Good that dwells therein, detest the bad of it; having 
found out the plot that it hath schemed against thee, by 
making void of sense those seeming things which men 
think senses. 

For that it hath with mass of matter blocked them up and 
crammed them full of loathsome lust, so that thou may’st 
not hear about the things that thou should’st hear, nor see 
the things that thou should’st see. 



COMMENTARY 

A PREACHING 


THERE is little to be said about this powerful appeal to cease from the 
drunkenness of physical sensations and to awaken to the Light. 

Reitzenstein (p. 194) calls it a “ Prophetenpredigf ’ and says that nowhere in the 
MSS. is it ascribed to Hermes; by which he can only mean that it bears no other 
superscription than the descriptive sentence which heads it. 

The style and spirit remind us not so much of C. H., iii. (iv.), as Reitzenstein (p. 
206, 1) suggests, as of the interpolated or superadded passages in the “Poemandres” 
treatise (§ 27): 

“O ye people, earthbom folk, ye who have given yourselves to drunkenness, and 
sleep, and ignorance, be sober now, cease from your surfeit, cease to be glamoured by 
irrational sleep!” 

Did this sentence give rise to our little sermon; or is the sentence a summary of 
the preaching? Or do both sentence and sermon come from a common stock? 

THE PROBABLE COMPLETION OF AN OXYRHYNCHUS LOGION 

The last hypothesis seems to be the most satisfactory choice; and we may 
compare what would appear to be a familiar figure of speech among such 
communities with logion 3 of the First Oxyrhynchus Fragment: 

‘Jesus saith: I stood in the midst of the world (zov xoopioo), and in the flesh did I 
appear unto them; and I found all men drunken, and none found I athirst among 
them; and my soul grieveth over the souls of men, because they are blind in their heart 
and see not ...” 

Can we fill up the missing word from our sermon? 

“But sober all they gage with their hearts' eyes on Him who willeth to be seen. ” 

The missing word seems, therefore, to be “God.” 


- 76 - 



The Gospel that is preached is the Beauty of the Gnosis, - “the Beauty of the 
Truth and Good that dwells therein”; just as in C. H., i. 27: 

“And I began to preach to men the beauty of Devotion and of the Gnosis. ” 

The tempest-tossed on the Sea of Ignorance are to make for the Harbour of 
Salvation - evidently some great organization devoted to the holy life; therein they 
must seek for one who knows, who can take them by the hand and lead them unto 
the Gates of the Gnosis. 

This suggests that the organization consisted of a general body, within which 
were grades of instruction; the many were striving for illumination, some few had 
reached it. 


- 77 - 



+- - » * 

CORPUS HERMETICUM VIII. (IX.) 

THAT NO ONE OF EXISTING THINGS DOTH PERISH, BUT MEN 
IN ERROR SPEAK OF THEIR CHANGES AS DESTRUCTIONS AND 

AS DEATHS 

OF HERMES TO TAT 

(Text: P. 56-59; Pat. 48a, 48b.) 

1. [Hermes.] 

ONCERNING Soul and Body, son, we now 
must speak; in what way Soul is deathless, and 
whence comes the activity 1 in composing and 
dissolving Body. 

For there’s no death for aught of things [that are]; the 
thought [this] word conveys, is either void of fact, or 
[simply] by the knocking off a syllable what is called 
“death,” doth stand for “deathless.” 2 3 

For death is of destruction, and nothing in the Cosmos is 
destroyed. For if Cosmos is second God, a life’ that 
cannot die, it cannot be that any part of this immortal life 
should die. All things in Cosmos are parts of Cosmos, and 
most of all is man, the rational animal. 

2. For truly first of all, eternal and transcending birth, is 
God the universals’ Maker. Second is he “after His 
image,” Cosmos, brought into being by Him, sustained 
and fed by Him, made deathless, as by his own Sire, living 
for aye, as ever free from death. 

Now that which ever-liveth, differs from the Eternal; for 
He 4 hath not been brought to being by another . , and even if 
He have been brought to being . , He hath not been brought 
into being by Himself, but ever is brought into being. 



1 Evegysia. 

2 The text is obscure, and the translations without exception make nonsense of it. Some words seem to be missing. 

3 Living thing, “animal.” 

A Sc. the Eternal. 


- 78 - 


For the Eternal, in that It is eternal, is the all. The Father 
is Himself eternal of Himself, but Cosmos hath become 
eternal and immortal by the Father. 

3. And of the matter stored beneath it 5 , the Father made 
of it a universal body, and packing it together made it 
spherical - wrapping it round the life 6 - [a sphere] which is 
immortal in itself, and that doth make materiality eternal. 

But He, the Father, full-filled with His ideas, did sow the 
lives 7 into the sphere, and shut them in as in a cave, 
willing to order forth 8 the life with every kind of living. 

So He with deathlessness enclosed the universal body, 
that matter might not wish to separate itself from body’s 
composition, and so dissolve into its own [original] 
unorder. 

For matter, son, when it was yet incorporate, was in 
unorder. And it doth still retain down here this [nature of 
unorder] enveloping the rest of the small lives 9 - that 
increase-and-decrease which men call death. 

4. It is round earthly lives that this unorder doth exist. For 
that the bodies of the heavenly ones preserve one order 
allotted to them from the Father as their rule 10 ; and it is by 
the restoration 11 of each one [of them] this order is 
preserved indissolute 12 . 

The “restoration” then of bodies on the earth is [thus 
their] composition, whereas their dissolution restores 
them to those bodies which can never be dissolved, that is 
to say, which know no death. Privation, thus, of sense is 
brought about, not loss of bodies. 


5 Sc. beneath the cosmos, world-order or universe. 

6 The text here seems to me to be very faulty; for tioiov, Ttoia, I read i^Cpov, i^cpa. In such unintelligible phrases as aUTCp 
to tioiov, and to pet’ amot) tioiov, the writer is evidently dealing with the Cosmos as the one life, the avnotcpov, from 
which all other lives are derived; and if he did not write onjTotcpov, he assuredly wrote £(pv. He wrote sense and not 
the nonsense of the present text. 

7 Sc. the great lives or so-called heavenly “bodies.” 

8 Or beautify. 

9 As distinguished from the great lives or animals, the so-called heavenly “bodies.” 

10 rf|v a Qxfy, - or source or principle. 

11 anoxcnaamaiQ, a term used of the cyclic return of stars to their original positions. 

12 If we may be permitted to coin a neologism. 


- 79 - 



5. Now the third life - Man, after the image of the Cosmos 
made, [and] having mind, after the Father’s will, beyond 
all earthly lives - not only doth have feeling with the 
second God, but also hath conception of the first; for of 
the one ’tis sensible as of a body, while of the other it 
conceives as bodiless and the Good Mind. 

Tat. Doth then this life not perish? 

Her. Hush, son! and understand what God, what Cosmos 
[is], what is a life that cannot die, and what a life subject to 
dissolution. 

Yea, understand the Cosmos is by God and in God; but 
Man by Cosmos and in Cosmos. 

The source and limit and the constitution of all things is 
God. 


ji. 






COMMENTARY 


THE COSMOS AS “SECOND GOD” 

The superscription enunciates the nature of the treatise. It is evidendy taken 
from the Dialogues to Tat, and originally formed part of some General 
Dissertation or of a collection of Dissertations. 

It formed part of an instruction in which the Cosmos was treated of as “Second 
God,” as we find it also in Philo 13 ; but just as Philo guards against any idea of 
duality, so does our treatise when it ends with the words (§ 5): 

‘The source and limit and the constitution of all things is God. ” 

The Great Body of the Cosmos, the Sphere or Perfect Form, the root of all 
forms, seems to be bounded by the idea of the fiEon or Eternity, or Deathlessness. 
It is, as it were, the Cave or Womb of all things in genesis, centred in the Pleroma 
of ideas, the Intelligible Cosmos, which is full-filled with the ideas of God (§ 3). 


13 Leg. Alleg, § 21; M. i. 82; P. 1103 (Ri. i. Queest. Sol., i. (quoted by Euseb., Prap. Ernng., vii. 13). See in the 
“Prolegomena,” “Philo Concerning the Logos.” 


- 80 - 



THE LAW OF APOKATASTASIS 


The eternal order and life of Cosmos is preserved by the law of apokatastasis or 
restoration (§ 4), the law of ever-becoming, and cyclic renewal, the making-new- 
again (dvccvscoaiq) of C. H., iii. (iv.) 1. 

There is no question of loss of body, - this is an illusion; there is a privation of 
sense, a going into latency of some particular phase of consciousness. 

There are then Great Lives - God, Cosmos, Man. Cosmos is made in the image 
of God, Man in the image of Cosmos. Therefore has Man sense and mind; by the 
former he is “in sympathy with” the Cosmos, as Body by the latter he is conscious 
of God as Mind, - that is the Bodiless. Or as we might phrase it, by sense Man 
knows the Sensible Cosmos, by mind the Intelligible Cosmos, the Good Mind; for 
God is Source and Limit and the Constitution of all tilings - the Cosmos, both 
Intelligible and Sensible, included. 


- 81 - 



+- - » ' 

CORPUS HERMETICUM IX. (X.) 

ON THOUGHT AND SENSE 

THAT THE BEAUTIFUL AND GOOD IS IN GOD ONLY AND 
ELSEWHERE NOWHERE 

(Text: P. 60-67; Pat. 14, 15.) 

1 . 


GAVE the Perfect Sermon (Logos) yesterday, 
Asclepius; to-day I think it right, as sequel 
thereunto, to go through point by point the 
Sermon about Sense. 



Now sense and thought do seem to differ, in that the 
former has to do with matter, the latter has to do with 
substance. But unto me both seem to be at-one and not to 
differ - in men I mean. In other lives 14 sense is at-oned 
with nature, but in men thought. 

Now mind doth differ just as much from thought as God 
doth from divinity. For that divinity by God doth come to 
be, and by mind thought, the sister of the word (logos ) 1 5 
and instruments of one another. For neither doth the 
word (logos) find utterance without thought, nor is thought 
manifested without word. 


2. So sense and thought both flow together into man, as 
though they were entwined with one another. For neither 
without sensing can one think, nor without thinking sense. 

But it is possible [they say] to think a thing apart from 
sense, as those who fancy sights in dreams. But unto me it 
seems that both of these activities occur in dream-sight, 
and sense doth pass out of the sleeping to the waking 
state. 


For man is separated into soul and body, and only when 
the two sides of his sense agree together, does utterance 
of its thought conceived by mind take place. 


14 Or animals. 

15 There is here the usual play on the meanings, reason, word, sermon or sacred discourse. 


- 82 - 



3. For it is mind that doth conceive all thoughts good 
thoughts - when it receives the seeds from God, their 
contraries when [it receiveth them] from one of the 
daimonials; no part of Cosmos being free of daimon, who 
stealthily doth creep into the daimon who’s illumined by 
God’s Light 16 , and sow in him the seed of its own energy. 

And mind conceives the seed thus sown, adultery, murder, 
parricide, [and] sacrilege, impiety, [and] strangling, casting 
down precipices, and all such other deeds as are the work 
of evil daimones. 

4. The seeds of God, ’tis true, are few, but vast and fair, 
and good - virtue and self-control, devotion. Devotion is 
God-gnosis; and he who knoweth God, being filled with 
all good things, thinks godly thoughts and not thoughts 
like the many [think] . 

For this cause they who Gnostic are 17 , please not the 
many, nor the many them. They are thought mad and 
laughed at 18 ; they’re hated and despised, and sometimes 
even put to death. 

For we did say 19 that bad must needs dwell here on earth, 
where ’tis in its own place. Its place is earth, and not 
Cosmos, as some will sometimes say with impious tongue. 

But he who is a devotee of God, will bear with all - once 
he has sensed the Gnosis. For such an one all things, e’en 
though they be for others bad, are for him good; 
deliberately he doth refer them all unto the Gnosis. And, 
thing most marvellous, ’tis he alone who maketh bad 
things good. 

5. But I return once more to the Discourse (Logos) on 
Sense. That sense doth share with thought in man, doth 
constitute him man. But ’tis not [every] man, as I have 
said, who benefits by thought; for this man is material, 
that other one substantial. 


16 That is to say man, or rather the ego in man. The translators seem to make nonsense of this passage through 
rejecting the original reading. 

17 oi ev yvwasi ovts?, lit. they who are in Gnosis. 

18 Cf. Plat., Phadr., 249 D: The wisdom-lover “is admonished, by the many as though he were beside himself.” 

19 Sc. in some other sermon. 


- 83 - 



For the material man, as I have said, [consorting] with the 
bad, doth have his seed of thought from daimons; while 
the substantial men [consorting] with the Good, are saved 
by God. 

Now God is Maker of all things, and in His making. He 
maketh all [at last] like to Himself; but they, while they’re 
becoming 211 good by exercise of their activity, are 
unproductive things. 

It is the working of the Cosmic Course 21 that maketh their 
becomings what they are, befouling some of them with 
bad and others of them making clean with good. 

For Cosmos, too, Asclepius, possesseth sense-and- 
thought peculiar to itself, not like to that of man; ’tis not 
so manifold, but as it were a better and a simpler one. 

6. The single sense-and-thought of Cosmos is to make all 
things, and make them back into itself again, as Organ of 
the Will of God, so organised that it, receiving all the 
seeds into itself from God, and keeping them within itself, 
may make all manifest, and [then] dissolving them, make 
them all new again; and thus, like a Good Gardener of 
Life, things that have been dissolved, it taketh to itself, 
and giveth them renewal once again. 

There is no thing to which it gives not life; but taking all 
unto itself it makes them live, and is at the same time the 
Place of Life and its Creator. 

7. Now bodies matter [-made] are in diversity. Some are of 
earth, of water some, some are of air, and some of fire. 

But they are all composed; some are more [composite], 
and some are simpler. The heavier ones are more 
[composed], the lighter less so. 


20 Or being made. 

21 It is difficult to bring out the full delicacy of wording of the original in translation. First God’s ultimate intention is 
stated to be the making all things like (ogoia) Himself; this is the great sameness of union with Him. But meantime 
while this making, creating or becoming, is going on, these imperfections cannot produce - that is, become creators 
in their turn; they are unproductive (oupoga). That which is the instrument of God’s making is the cosmic course 
(cpoga). We are finally (§ 7) told that it is bodies which are the cause of difference or diversity (ev Sioapoga), the 
opposite pole, so to speak, to the likeness (opoia) with God. 


- 84 - 



It is the speed of Cosmos’ Course that works the 
manifoldness of the kinds of births. For being a most 
swift Breath, it doth bestow their qualities on bodies 
together with the One Pleroma - that of Life. 

8. God, then, is Sire of Cosmos; Cosmos, of [all] in 
Cosmos. And Cosmos is God’s Son; but things in 
Cosmos are by Cosmos. 

And properly hath it been called Cosmos [Order]; for that 
it orders 22 all with their diversity of birth, with its not 
leaving aught without its life, with the unweariedness of its 
activity, the speed of its necessity, the composition of its 
elements, and order of its creatures. 

The same, then, of necessity and of propriety should have 
the name of Order. 

The sense-and-thought, then, of all lives doth come into 
them from without, inbreathed by what contains [them 
all]; whereas Cosmos receives them once for all together 
with its coming into being, and keeps them as a gift from 
God. 

9. But God is not, as some suppose, beyond the reach of 
sense-and-thought. It is through superstition men thus 
impiously speak. 

For all the things that are, Asclepius, all are in God, are 
brought by God to be, and do depend on Him - both 
things that act through bodies, and things that through 
soul- sub stance make [other things] to move, and things 
that make things live by means of spirit, and things that 
take unto themselves the things that are worn out. 

And righdy so; nay, I would rather say, He doth not have 
these things; but I speak forth the truth, He is them all 
Himself. He doth not get them from without, but gives 
them out [from Him] . 

This is God’s sense-and-thought, ever to move all things. 
And never time shall be when e’en a whit of things that 
are shall cease; and when I say “a whit of things that are,” 


22 Or adorns. 


- 85 - 



I mean a whit of God. For things that are, God hath; nor 
aught [is there] without Him, nor [is] He without aught. 

10. These things should seem to thee, Asclepius, if thou 
dost understand them, true; but if thou dost not 
understand, things not to be believed. 

To understand is to believe, to not believe is not to 
understand. 

My word (logos) doth go before [thee] 21 to the truth. But 
mighty is the mind, and when it hath been led by word up 
to a certain point, it hath the power to come before 
[thee 24 ] to the truth. 

And having thought o’er all these things, and found them 
consonant with those which have already been translated 
by the reason, it 25 hath [e’en now] believed, and found its 
rest in that Fair Faith. 

To those, then, who by God[’s good aid] do understand 
the things that have been said [by us] above, they’re 
credible; but unto those who understand them not, 
incredible. 

Let so much, then, suffice on thought-and-sense. 


si 



T* * 




COMMENTARY 


TITLE AND ORDERING 

This treatise bears a double title: - “On Thought and Sense,” and “That the 
Beautiful and Good is in God only.” The former heading is clearly taken from the 
concluding words: “Let so much then suffice on thought-and-sense”; whereas the 
introductory sentence speaks of the Sermon on Sense only. The latter heading 
seems to be a thoughtless repetition of the title of C. H., vi. (vii.). 

The opening words: “I gave the Perfect Sermon yesterday, Asclepius,” inform us 
not only that we have to do with an Asclepius Dialogue, but also that our sermon 


23 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 11; vii. (viii.) 2; x. (xi.) 21; R. 23, n. 5. 

24 That is, presumably, before the pupil of the Gnosis is conscious of it in his physical brain. 

25 Sc the mind. 


- 86 - 



followed direcdy on die “Perfect Sermon,” a Latin version of which has fortunately 
been preserved to us 26 . 

It is, therefore, of very great interest to find that Lactantius 27 , in quoting a 
sentence from our treatise (§ 4) - “Devotion is God-gnosis” - continues with the 
words: “Asclepius, his hearer, has also explained the same idea at greater length in 
the Perfect Sermon.” 

Lactantius had, therefore, a collection before him in which these two sermons 
stood in close connection. 

Reitzenstein (p. 195) thinks that our sermon must be an extract from a longer 
one, because he cannot bring himself to believe that so short a treatise could have 
been found in immediate connection (as the opening words suggest) with so 
lengthy and detailed a tractate as the “Perfect Sermon.” This may be so; and yet the 
formal beginning and ending of our sermon would seem to suggest that we are 
dealing with a complete tractate and not with an extract. 

“SENSE-AND-THOUGHT” 

The doctrine that in men “sense-and-thought” together constitutes human 
“sense” throws some light on the meaning of the term “sense” as used elsewhere in 
the Trismegistic literature, where we should expect to find “mind” employed, and 
that, too, in the sense of the higher mind. 

Normal human “thought,” then, is, so to say, sensible, entirely bound up in 
sense-impressions; it is the mind alone that can soar beyond the senses, for it alone 
can be “illumined by God’s Light” (§ 3). 

The mind is, as it were, a womb or woman, that can be impregnated either by 
the “Seeds of God” or by the “Daimonial Energy”; she thus conceives and brings 
forth virtues or vices. 

All of this is precisely the same doctrine as Philo preaches, as may be seen by the 
passages we have quoted in the “Prolegomena” on the subject of the “Sacred 
Marriage.” 


THOSE IN GNOSIS 

The Seeds of God are Virtue and Self-control and Devotion or Piety; and 
Devotion in its true sense is God-gnosis, or Knowledge of God. The Gnostics, 
then, “they who are in Gnosis” - a curious expression - because of their natural 
divorcement from the “world,” “please not the many, nor the many them.” 

“They are thought mad and laughed at; they’re hated and despised, and 
sometimes even put to death.” 

Mark the impersonal note, the calm laying down of the causes of 
misunderstanding between the “many” and the “few”; and compare this with the 


26 For it would, of course, be absurd to suppose that the “Perfect Sermon” could in any way be thought to indicate 
C. H., vi. (vii.), the last Asclepius Dialogue in our Corpus; especially when our sermon (§ 4) directly combats the 
teaching of C. H., vi. 

27 Div. Institt , ., ii. 15 (Ed. Fritz., i. 106); cf. also v. 14. 


- 87 - 



more personal note of the saying underlying the following Synoptic 
accommodations: 

“Blessed are ye when men hate you and excommunicate you, and revile and 
expel your Name as evil, for the Son of Man’s sake” (Luke vi. 22). 

“Blessed are ye when men revile you and persecute you and say all evil against 
you, lying, for My sake” (Matt. v. 11). 

It is clear, at least it seems so to me, that “Luke” has kept closer to the original, 
and that that original was addressed not only to the members of a community, but 
to those who had been cast forth from some other community “for the sake of the 
Son of Man” - that is, because of the immediate inspiration of the Logos, which 
doubtless did not pay sufficient attention to the prejudices of the “many” of that 
community. 

“Matthew,” on the contrary, seems to have adapted the Saying for general 
purposes and the necessities of the Cult of Jesus 28 . 

THE TRUE GNOSTIC 

Excellent also is the doctrine that the true “Gnostic,” the man who is 
consciously growing into the stature of the Christ, the true “Devotee of God,” 
“will bear with all,” for he is beginning to know the Reason of diings. 

“For such an one all tilings, e’en though they be for others bad, are for him 
good; deliberately he doth refer them all unto the Gnosis.” 

He sees the Good, he sees God, in all things. He is the true Alchemist. For 
“thing most marvellous, ’tis he alone who makedi bad things good”; by spiritual 
alchemy he transmutes the evil of the world to good; he drains the “cup of 
bitterness” unto the dregs, and transmutes it into the pure Water of Life. 

In every Man, then, there are two “men,” the material (or hylic) and the 
substantial (or spiritual, o'6aiob8r]p). 

Evil, however, is not a permanent thing; it is but the process of “becoming 
good,” the productive side of diings (§ 5). 

THE GOAL OF THE GNOSIS 

It is difficult to bring out the delicacy of the wording of the original in 
translation. First God’s ultimate intention is stated to be the making of all things 
like unto (Ojxoioc) Himself; the world-process is to be ultimately consummated in 
the Great Sameness of Union with Him. But meantime while this making, creating 
or becoming, or transformation, is going on, the imperfections cannot produce, 
that is, become creators in their turn; they are unproductive (apopcc). That which is 
the instrument or organ of God’s making is the Cosmic Course (popa). We are 
finally (§ 7) told that the differences of bodies are conditioned by the speed of this 
Cosmic Course; therefore the opposite poles, Other and Same, are both ultimately 
referable to Cosmos, the Likeness of God. 


28 R. (p. 213, 1) brings this passage of our sermon into connection with some assumed persecution of the 
Poemandres communities in the course of the fourth century; but I cannot myself see the slightest ground for such 
an assumption. 


- 88 - 



The end to be achieved is to develop the “sense-and-thought” of the Cosmos, 
the One Sense, not manifold, but simple. This is the deliberate working with the 
Will of God, the Cosmic Will, the perpetual renewing of all things (dvavdojmc). 

The Cosmos, then, as the Logos of God, is the Good Gardener of Life; it is 
both the place of Life and its Creator - that is to say, both female and male, both 
Mother and Father. 


THE POSSIBILITY OF KNOWING GOD 

But the Cosmos is not apart from God, nor even in God; God does not have 
Cosmos as a possession, but is Cosmos and all therein (§ 9). Cosmos is Son of 
God, His Very Self (§ 8). 

Therefore we can learn to know somewhat of the nature of God by sense and 
thought, for, “God is not, as some suppose, beyond the reach of sense and 
thought” (avcua0y]x6q xai avorpog); that is, God does not entirely transcend sense 
and thought, for God is all tilings. 

“As some suppose” doubtless refers again to the “blasphemers” of § 4 - that is, 
the apparently dualistic doctrine set forth in C. H., vi. (vii.) 29 . 

And so, finally, we learn that Faith, in the true sense, is a certitude of the mind, 
or of true manhood. “To understand is to believe” (§ 10). Gnosis and not belief is 
the Fair Faith. 

Compare with this the “Perfect Sermon,” x. 1 : 

' The reason for a thesis such as this, 0 my Asclepius, I would that thou should 'st 
grasp, not only with the keen attention of thy soul, hut also with its living power as 
well. 

“ For ’tis a reason that most men cannot believe; the Perfect and the True are to be 
grasped by the more holy minds. ” 


29 Reitzenstein (p. 171, 2) compares this doctrine of the insensibility and incognizability of God with the Sabasan 
Gnosis. 


- 89 - 



+- - ♦ 

CORPUS HERMETICUM X. (XI.) 

THE KEY 

OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

(Text: P. 67-84; Pat . 9b-12.) 

1. Hermes. 

Y yesterday’s discourse (logos) I did devote to 
thee, Asclepius, and so ’tis [only] right I should 
devote to-day’s to Tat; and this the more 
because ’tis the abridgment of the General Sermons 
(Logoi) which he has had addressed to him. 

“God, Father and the Good,” then, Tat, hath’ 11 the same 
nature, or more exactly, energy. 

For nature is a predicate of growth, and used of things that 
change, both mobile and immobile, that is to say, both 
human and divine, each one of which He mlleth into 
being. 

But energy consists in something else, as we have shown in 
treating of the rest, both things divine and human things 31 ; 
which thing we ought to have in mind when treating of 
the Good’ 2 . 

2. God’s energy is then His Will; further His essence is to 
will the being of all things. For what is “God and Father 
and the Good” but the to be of all that are not yet? Nay, 
subsistence” self of everything that is; - this, then, is God, 
this Father, this the Good; to Him is added naught of all 
the rest. 

And though the Cosmos, that is to say the Sun, is also sire 
himself to them that share in him; yet so far is he not the 
cause of good unto the lives, he is not even of their living. 



30 The three are only different names for one idea; the verb is in the singular in the Greek. Cf. C. H., ii. (iii.) 16 and 
17: “Good then is God and God is Good”; and “The other name of God is Father.” 

31 That is to say, presumably, in the General Sermons 

32 . Lit. of this 

33 . U7iag§i?. Cf. C.H., xvi. 4. 


- 90 - 



So that e’en if he be a sire, he is entirely so by the 
compulsion of the Good’s Good-will, apart from which 
nor being nor becoming could e’er be. 

3. Again, the parent is the children’s cause, both on the 
father’s and the mother’s side’ 4 , only by sharing in 35 the 
Good’s desire [that doth pour] through the Sun. It is the 
Good which doeth the creating. 

And such a power can be possessed by no one else than 
Him alone who taketh naught’ 6 , but mils all things to be; I 
will not, Tat, say makes. 

For that the maker is defective for long periods (in which 
he sometimes makes, and sometimes doth not make) both 
in the quality and in the quantity [of what he makes]; in 
that he sometimes maketh them so many and such like, 
and sometimes the reverse. 

But “God and Father and the Good” is [cause] for all to 
be. So are at least these things for who can see. 

4. For It doth will to be, and It is both Itself and most of 
all by reason of’ 7 Itself. Indeed all other things beside are 
just because of It; for the distinctive feature of the Good 
is “that it should be known.” Such is the Good, O Tat. 

Tat. Thou hast, O father, filled us so full 38 of this so good 
and fairest Sight, that thereby my mind’s eye hath now 
become for me almost a thing to worship. 

For that the Vision of the Good doth not, like the sun’s 
beam, fire-like blaze on the eyes and make them close; 
nay, on the contrary, it shineth forth and maketh to 
increase the seeing’ 9 of the eye, as far as e’er a man hath 
the capacity to hold the inflow of the radiance that the 
mind alone can see. 

Not only does it come more swiftly down to us, but it 
does us no harm, and is instinct with all immortal life. 


34 Lit. both with regard to seed and nourishment. 

35 Lit. taking. 

36 Cf. C. H., ii. (iii.) 16: “The Good is He who gives all things and naught receives.” 

37 Lit. for. 

38 E7tXr]gcoaa?, - reminding us of 7iM]{X0(jia. 

39 Lit. light. 


-91 - 



5. They who are able to drink in a somewhat more than 
others of this Sight, ofttimes from out the body fall asleep 
into this fairest Spectacle, as was the case with Uranus and 
Cronus, our forebears 40 . May this be our lot too, O father 
mine! 

Her. Yea, may it be, my son! But as it is, we are not yet 
strung to the Vision, and not as yet have we the power 
our mind’s eye to unfold and gaze upon the Beauty of the 
Good - Beauty that naught can e’er corrupt or any 
comprehend. 

For [only] then wilt thou upon It gaze when thou canst 
say no word concerning It. For Gnosis of the Good is 
holy silence and a giving holiday to every sense. 

6. For neither can he who perceiveth It, perceive aught 
else; nor he who gazeth on It, gaze on aught else; nor hear 
aught else, nor stir his body any way. Staying his body’s 
every sense and every motion he stayeth still. 

And shining then all round his mind, It shines through his 
whole soul, and draws it out of body, transforming all of 
him to essence. 

For it is possible, my son, that a man’s soul should be 
made like to God, e’en while it still is in a body, if it doth 
contemplate the Beauty of the Good. 

7. Tat. Made like to God! What dost thou, father, mean? 
Her. Of every soul apart are transformations, son. 

Tat. What meanest thou? Apart! 

Her. 41 Didst thou not, in the General Sermons, hear that 
from One Soul - the All-soul - come all these souls which 
are made to revolve in all the cosmos, as though divided 
off? 

Of these souls, then, it is that there are many changes, 
some to a happier lot and some to [j ust ] the contrary of 
this. 


40 See Lact, D. Institt., i. 11; P. S. A., xi. 4, xxxvii. 3; and Ex. i. 4. 

41 From here to end of § 8 is quoted by Stobatus, Phjs., I. xli. 48 (G. i. 429, 430; W. 416, 18 ff.). 


- 92 - 



Thus some that were once creeping things change into 
things that in the water dwell, the souls of water things 
change to earth-dwellers, those that live on the earth 
change into things with wings, and souls that live in air 
change into men, while human souls reach the first step of 
deathlessness changed into daimones. 

And so they circle to the choir of the Inerrant Gods; for 
of the Gods there are two choirs, the one Inerrant, and 
the other Errant. And this is the most perfect glory of the 
soul. 

8. But if a soul on entering in the body of a man persisteth 
in its vice 42 , it neither tasteth deathlessness nor shareth in 
the Good; but speeding back again it turns into the path 
that leads to creeping things. This is the sentence of the 
vicious soul. 

And the soul’s vice is ignorance 4 ’. For that the soul who 
hath no knowledge of the things that are, or knowledge of 
their nature, or of Good, is blinded by the body’s passions 
and tossed about. 

This wretched soul, not knowing what she is, becomes the 
slave of bodies of strange form in sorry plight, bearing the 
body as a load; not as the ruler, but the ruled. This 
[ignorance] is the soul’s vice. 

9. But on the other hand the virtue of the soul is Gnosis. 
For he who knows, he good and pious is, and still while 
on the earth 44 divine. 

Tat. But who is such an one, O father mine? 

Her. He who doth not say much or lend his ear to much. 
For he who spendeth time in arguing and hearing 
arguments, doth shadow fight. For “God, the Father and 
the Good,” is not to be obtained by speech or hearing. 

And yet though this is so, there are in all the beings senses, 
in that they cannot without senses be. 


42 sav xaxr| |xsivr|. 

43 Cf. C. H., xii. (xiii.) 3: “The great ill of the soul is Godlessness”; also below § 20: “What greater chastisement of any 
human soul can there be, son, than lack of piety?” 

44 Lit. already. 


- 93 - 



But Gnosis is far different from sense. For sense is 
brought about by that which hath the mastery o’er us, 
while Gnosis is the end of science 4 ', and science is God’s 
gift. 

10. All science is incorporal, the instrument it uses being 
the mind, just as the mind employs the body. 

Both then come into bodies, |I mean] both things that are 
cognizable by mind alone and things material 46 . For all 
things must consist out of antithesis and contrariety; and 
this can otherwise not be. 

Tat. Who then is this material God of whom thou 
speakest? 

Her. Cosmos is beautiful , , but is not goof 7 - for that it is 
material and freely passible 48 ; and though it is the first of 
all things passible, yet is it in the second rank of being and 
wanting in itself. 

And though it never hath itself its birth in time, but ever 
is, yet is its being in becoming, becoming for all time the 
genesis of qualities and quantities; for it is mobile and all 
material motion’s genesis 49 . 

11. It is intelligible'" rest that moves material motion in 
this way 51 , since Cosmos is a sphere - that is to say, a head. 
And naught of head above’s material, as naught of feet 
below’s intelligible 02 , but all material. 

And head itself moved in a sphere-like way - that is to say, 
as head should move 0 ’, is mind. 

All then that are united to the “tissue” of this “head” (in 
which 04 is soul) are in their nature free from death, - just 


45 smovr\\ir\<;. 

46 Or hylic. 

47 But cf. P. S. A., xxvii. 1. 

48 That is capable of suffering, or impressionable by agencies other than itself. 

49 Genesis and becoming are both yeveen? in Greek. 

50 Noetic as opposed to hylic - the antithesis and contrariety mentioned above. 

51 Namely the ever-becoming of genesis. 

52 Or mental, in the sense of being of the same nature as the mind. 

53 xecpatixccx;. 

54 In which “tissue.” 


- 94 - 



as when body hath been made in soul, are things that have 
more soul than body. 

Whereas those things which are at greater distance from 
this “tissue” - there, where are things which have a greater 
share of body than of soul - are by their nature subject 
unto death. 

The whole, however, is a life; so that the universe consists 
of both the hylic and of the intelligible 0 '. 

12. Again, the Cosmos is the first of living things, while 
man is second after it, though first of things subject to 
death. 

Man hath the same ensouling power in him as all the rest 
of living things 56 ; yet is he not only not good, but even 
evil 07 , for that he’s subject unto death 08 . 

For though the Cosmos also is not good in that it suffers 
motion, it is not evil, in that it is not subject unto death. 
But man, in that he’s subject both to motion and to death, 
is evil 09 . 

13. Now then the principles 61 ' of man are this-wise 
vehicled: mind in the reason (, logos ), the reason in the soul, 
soul in the spirit 61 , [and] spirit in the body. 

Spirit pervading [body] 62 by means of veins and arteries 
and blood, bestows upon the living creature motion, and 
as it were doth bear it in a way. 

For this cause some do think the soul is blood, in that 
they do mistake its nature, not knowing that [at death] it is 
the spirit that must first withdraw into the soul, whereon 
the blood congeals and veins and arteries are emptied, and 


55 §§ 12, 13 are quoted by Stobasus, Phjs., I. xxxix. 9 (G. i. 307; W. 350, 13 ff.). 

56 That is to say, the world-system itself and all the globes in it. 

57 Cf. Ex. i. 11 and 15. 

58 Whereas the system and its globes are regarded as practically immortal. 

59 Reitzenstein (p. 40, 1) gives a revised text of the major part of this utterance of Hermes, from “Cosmos is 
beautiful” onwards, but unfortunately he omits just the most obscure sentences in it. 

60 Lit. a man’s soul, where 7S used in a general sense, and not in the particular sense applied to it in the category 
which immediately follows. 

61 Ttvsupati. 

62 Cf. P. S. A., vi. 4. 


- 95 - 



then the living creature is withdrawn; and this is body’s 
death. 

14. Now from One Source 6 ’ all things depend; while 
Source [dependeth] from the One and Only [One]. Source 
is, moreover, moved to become Source again; whereas the 
One standeth perpetually and is not moved. 

Three then are they: “God, the Father and the Good,” 
Cosmos and man. 

God doth contain Cosmos; Cosmos [containeth] man. 
Cosmos is e’er God’s Son, man as it were Cosmos’s child. 

15. Not that, however, God ignoreth man; nay, right well 
doth He know him, and willeth to be known. 

This is the sole salvation for a man - God’s Gnosis. This 
is the Way Up to the Mount 64 . 

By Him alone the soul becometh good, not whiles is 
good, whiles evil, but [good] out of necessity. 

Tat. What dost thou mean, Thrice-greatest one? 

Her. Behold an infant’s soul, my son, that is not yet cut 
off 65 , because its body is still small and not as yet come 
unto its full bulk 66 . 

Tat. How? 

Her. A thing of beauty altogether is [such a soul] to see, 
not yet befouled by body’s passions, still all but hanging 
from the Cosmic Soul! 

But when the body grows in bulk and draweth down the 
soul into its mass, then doth the soul cut off itself and 
bring upon itself forgetfulness, and no more shareth in the 
Beautiful and Good. And this forgetfulness becometh 
vice. 

16. It is the same for them who go out from the body. 

For when the soul withdraws into itself, the spirit doth 
contract itself within the blood, and soul within the 


63 a Qxn- 

64 Lit. to Olympus. 

65 Sc. from the world-soul. 

66 Cf. the instructive exposition of Basilides in F. F. F., pp. 274 f. 


- 96 - 



spirit 67 . And then the mind, stript of its wrappings, and 
naturally divine, taking unto itself a fiery body, doth 
traverse every space, after abandoning the soul unto its 
judgment and whatever chastisement it hath deserved. 

Tat. 6 * What dost thou, father, mean by this? The mind is 
parted from the soul and soul from spirit? Whereas thou 
said’st the soul was the mind’s vesture, and the soul’s the 
spirit. 

17. Tier. The hearer, son, should think with him who 
speaks and breathe with him 69 ; nay, he should have a 
hearing subtler than the voice of him who speaks. 

It is, son, in a body made of earth that this arrangement of 
the vestures comes to pass. For in a body made of earth it 
is impossible the mind should take its seat itself by its own 
self in nakedness. 

For neither is it possible on the one hand the earthy body 
should contain such immortality, nor on the other that so 
great a virtue should endure a body passible in such close 
contact with it. It taketh, then, the soul for as it were an 
envelope. 

And soul itself, being too a thing divine, doth use the 
spirit as its envelope, while spirit doth pervade the living 
creature. 

18. When then the mind doth free itself from the earth- 
body, it straightway putteth on its proper robe of fire, 
with which it could not dwell in an earth-body. 

For earth doth not bear fire; for it is all set in a blaze even 
by a small spark. And for this cause is water poured round 
earth, to be a guard and wall, to keep the blazing of the 
fire away. 

But mind, the swiftest thing of all divine out-thinkings, 
and swifter than all elements, hath for its body fire. 


67 This is generally translated “the spirit is contracted into the blood, and the soul into the spirit,” but such a 
translation contradicts § 13, where we are told that “the spirit withdraws into the soul” at death. It seems to mean that 
the spirit passes ivithin, out of the blood, and the soul is then clothed in a spirit-vesture, or borne in a spirit-vehicle. 

68 From here to the end of § 18 is quoted by Stobasus, Phjs., xl. 3 (G. i. 312, 313; W. 310, 25 ff.); only the dialogue is 
ascribed in error to Asclepius and Tat and not to Hermes and Tat. 

69 Cf. P. S. A., x. i. 


- 97 - 



For mind being builder 711 doth use the fire as tool for the 
construction of all things - the Mind of all [for the 
construction] of all things, but that of man only for things 
on earth. 

Stript 71 of its fire the mind on earth cannot make things 
divine, for it is human in its dispensation 2 . 

19. The soul in man, however, - not every soul, but one 
that pious is - is a daimonic something and divine. 

And such a soul when from the body freed, if it have 
fought the fight of piety - the fight of piety is to know 
God and to do wrong to no man - such soul becomes 
entirely mind. 

Whereas the impious soul remains in its own essence, 
chastised by its own self, and seeking for an earthy body 
where to enter, if only it be human. 

For that no other body can contain a human soul; nor is it 
right that any human soul should fall into the body of a 
thing that doth possess no reason. For that the law of 
God is this: to guard the human soul from such 
tremendous outrage 71 . 

20. Tat. How father, then, is a man’s soul chastised? 

Her. What greater chastisement of any human soul can 
there be, son, than lack of piety? What fire has so fierce 
flame as lack of piety? What ravenous beast so mauls the 
body as lack of piety the very soul? 

Dost thou not see what hosts of ills the impious soul doth 
bear? 

It shrieks and screams: I burn; I am ablaze; I know not 
what to cry or do; ah, wretched me, I am devoured by all 
the ills that compass me about; alack, poor me, I neither 
see nor hear! 


70 8y]|Aiougy6<;. 

71 [Ed. Sc. stripped] 

72 xfj 8ioixr]aei, i.e. in its economy. 

73 This paragraph is quoted by Stobasus, Phys., xli. 49 (G. i. 430, 431; W. 417, 15 f£). For the idea, cf. P. S. A., xxxii. 2. 


- 98 - 



Such are the cries wrung from a soul chastised; not, as the 
many think, and thou, son, dost suppose, that a [man’s] 
soul, passing from body, is changed into a beast. 

Such is a very grave mistake, for that the way a soul doth 
suffer chastisement is this: 

21. When mind becomes a daimon, the law requires that it 
should take a fiery body to execute the services of God; 
and entering in the soul most impious it scourgeth it with 
whips made of its sins. 

And then the impious soul, scourged with its sins, is 
plunged in murders, outrage, blasphemy, in violence of all 
kinds, and all the other things whereby mankind is 
wronged 74 . 

But on the pious soul the mind doth mount and guide it 73 
to the Gnosis’ Light. And such a soul doth never tire in 
songs of praise [to God] and pouring blessing on all men, 
and doing good in word and deed to all, in imitation of its 
Sire 76 . 

22. Wherefore, my son, thou shouldst give praise to God 
and pray that thou mayst have thy mind Good [Mind]. It 
is, then, to a better state the soul doth pass; it cannot to a 
worse. 

Further 77 there is an intercourse 78 of souls; those of the 
gods have intercourse with those of men, and those of 
men with souls of creatures which possess no reason. 

The higher, further, have in charge the lower; the gods 
look after men, men after animals irrational 79 , while God 
hath charge of all; for He is higher than them all and all 
are less than He. 

Cosmos is subject, then, to God, man to the Cosmos, and 
irrationals to man. But God is o’er them all, and God 
contains them all. 


74 Cf. P. S. A., xxv. 4 and xxviii. 1. 

75 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 11; vii. (viii.) 11; ix. (x.) 10; R. 23, n. 5. 

76 Namely, the Good. 

77 From here to the end is quoted by Stobteus, Phjs., I. xxxix. 8 (G. i. 305-307; W. 303, 14 f£). 

78 xoivwvia. Cf. P. J. A., xxiii. 1. 

79 Cf. P. S. A., v. 1. 


- 99 - 



God’s rays, to use a figure, are His energies; the Cosmos’s 
are natures; the arts and sciences are man’s 80 . 

The energies act through the Cosmos, thence through the 
nature-rays of Cosmos upon man; the nature-rays [act] 
through the elements; man [acteth] through the sciences 
and arts. 

23. This is the dispensation 81 of the universe, depending 
from the nature of the One, pervading [all things] through 
the Mind, than which 82 is naught diviner or of greater 
energy; and naught a greater means for the at-oning men 
to gods and gods to men. 

He, [Mind,] is the Good Daimon. Blessed the soul that is 
most filled with Him, and wretched 8 ’ is the soul that’s 
empty of the Mind. 

Tat. Father, what dost thou mean, again? 

Her. 84 Dost think then, son, that every soul hath the Good 
[Mind]? For ’tis of Him we speak, not of the mind in 
service 8 ’ of which we just were speaking, the mind sent 
down for [the soul’s] chastisement. 

24. For soul without the mind “can neither speak nor 
act.” 86 For oftentimes the mind doth leave the soul, and at 
that time the soul nor sees nor understands, but is just like 
a thing that hath no reason. Such is the power of mind. 

Yet doth it not endure a sluggish 87 soul, but leaveth such a 
soul tied to the body and bound tight down by it. Such 
soul, my son, doth not have Mnd; and therefore such an 
one should not be called a man , 88 For that man is a thing- 


80 Cf. Ex. viii. 1. 

81 Stobcrjaig, compare 19. 

82 Sc. the Mind. 

83 xaxoSalpwv, as opposed to 6 ayaOdg Salpwv. It is impossible to reproduce the original word-play in translation. 

84 Stobasus (Gaisford) here reads “A.” - that is, Asclepius. 

85 ton iiTtrigsxixou, compare § 21, “the services of God” (tag ton Oeou UTtrigsaiag); that is to say, Hermes speaks of 
the Universal Mind and not of the mind in man. 

86 A quotation from the ancient gnomic poet Theognis (v. 177). Theognis lived c. 570-490 B.C. 

87 vwtgag, - ? vwOgag. Everard translates “an idle or lazy soul,” in his usual slipshod fashion of inserting doubles; 
Parthey gives “ inertem animani Menard, "Tame vicieuse”-, Chambers, “inert.” Several of the old editors omit the entire 
sentence. 

88 Cf. Philo, De Son/., § 20; M. i. 639; P. 584 (Ri. iii. 241): “not for those who are called men, but for those who are truly 
so.” 


- 100 - 



of-life 89 divine; man is not measured with the rest of lives 
of things upon the earth, but with the lives above in 
heaven, who are called gods. 

Nay more, if we must boldly speak the truth, the true 
“man” is e’en higher than the gods, or at the [very] least 
the gods and men are every whit in power each with the 
other equal. 

25. For no one of the gods in heaven shall come down on 
the earth, o’er- stepping heaven’s limit; whereas man doth 
mount up to heaven and measure it; he knows what things 
of it are high, what things are low, and learns precisely all 
things else besides. And greater thing than all; without 
e’en quitting earth, he doth ascend above. So vast a sweep 
doth he possess of ecstasy 90 . 

For this cause can a man dare say that man on earth is god 
subject to death, while god in heaven is man from death 
immune. 

Wherefore the dispensation of all things is brought about 
by means of 91 these, the twain - Cosmos and Man 92 - but 
by 93 the One. 



89 Or animal. 

90 Excrcaaewg, lit. extension, or consciousness. 

91 8ia. 

92 Cf. P. S. A., x. 3. 

93 Vno. 


- 101 - 



COMMENTARY 


THE CONSUMMATION OF THE “GENERAL SERMONS” 

What “yesterday’s sermon,” which Hermes addressed to Asclepius, may have 
been, we have no means of deciding. The similarity of the phrase with the opening 
words of C. H., ix. (x.) is noticeable, and points, perhaps, to a collection of 
Sermons to Asclepius and Tat strung together in some chronological order, as 
delivered day by day. If this be the fact, however, we must assume that such 
introductions were prefixed by the editor of that collection. 

“The Key of Thrice-greatest Hermes” must have been considered one of the 
most remarkable documents of the school, for, as we have already mentioned in 
the case of “The Cup” treatise, the apocryphal “Books of Moses” plagiarize the 
title 94 . 

That it was an important treatise may also be seen from the fact that Stobasus 
reproduces no less than five extracts from it under the title, “From the [Sermons] 
of Hermes to Tat,” or simply “Of Hermes.” Strangely enough in two cases (xxxix. 8 
and xl. 3) S to bee us makes the persons of the dialogue Asclepius and Tat; this, 
however, must be a mistake, for it contradicts his own headings, it contradicts the 
nature of the sermon, it contradicts the supposed introduction of the editor of the 
collection from whom the redactor of our Corpus has taken his text, and it 
contradicts Chalcidius, who quotes from our treatise as a treatise of Hermes 93 . 

Nevertheless, in spite of the importance of the treatise, it purports to be an 
epitome 96 , an abridgment of the “General Sermons” (oi ysvixol koyoi) 97 addressed 
to Tat. 

The sermon itself, however, has by no means the appearance of being an 
abridgment; on the contrary, it is one of the most complete and fundamental 
expositions that we have. 

I would, therefore, suggest that the general reference in the words, “as we have 
shown in treating of the rest” (§ 1), and the precise reference to “The General 
Sermons,” in § 7, have originated this wording of the introduction with the editor 
of the collection of Asclepius and Tat Sermons which I have previously supposed. 
It is a gloss of the editor and no part of the original text. 

If this argument holds good, “The Key,” instead of being an epitome, is a 
further teaching that presupposes a prior instruction already given in “The General 
Sermons,” and so stands out as a more intimate exposition of the inward doctrine 
of the higher grades of the school. 


94 R. 182, 3; 190, 2. 

95 Chalcid., Comment, in Timceum (ed. Fabric.), p. 350. 

96 Compare also the introduction to C. H., xvi. (see R. 191, 1); and also Ex. i. 16 and Comment. 

97 Cf. § 7, below; C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 1; and Exs. ix. 1 and xviii. 1. The title must be so translated, I think, in spite of the 
fact that in the introductory words of the above treatise the term is immediately followed by the antithesis “rebirth” 
(TtaXiyysvsoia), as though the Sermons were on birth or genesis (ysvsai?), - which, as we know from the Naassene 
Document, was the subject of the Lesser Mysteries, whereas Rebirth was that of the Greater. Everard gives “in the 
general speeches”; Parthey, “in communibus ”; Menard, “dans les discours generally ?' ; Chambers, “in the Generalities.” 


- 102 - 



Reitzenstein (p. 461) would have it that the doctrine of Sermons, ix. (x.) and x. 
(xi.), is a mediate one between the dualism of vi. (vii.) and the pronounced 
pantheistic mysticism of v. (vi.) and xi. (xii.); but I should fancy that these labels, 
even if they are correctly attached, would not represent such overwhelming 
contradictions to the Trismegistic doctors as they appear to do to their modern 
critics. There were different points of view; there were different grades of 
instruction; every doctrine had more truth in it at the proper time and in the right 
place. In any case this sermon is one of die most beautiful tractates preserved to us. 

THE WILL OF GOD 

1 . Our treatise begins with the statement that the universe and all therein is due 
to the Energy or Effective Working of God - that is to say, His Will. This Will is 
immutable and constant - the Law of the universe. 

How subtly these philosophers in their most intimate circles used these terms 
may be seen from the Gnostic Doctor, Basilides, who writes: 

“Naught was, - neither matter, nor substance, nor voidness of substance, nor 
simplicity, nor impossibility of composition, nor inconceptibility, nor imperceptibility, 
neither man, nor angel [Hermetice, daimon], nor God; in fine, neither anything at all 
for which man has ever found a name, nor any operation which falls within the range 
either of his perception or conception. 

“Such, or rather far more removed from the power of man ’s comprehension, was 
the state of Non-Being, when the Deity beyond Being, without thinking, or feeling, or 
determining or choosing, or being compelled, or desiring, willed to create universality. ” 

‘ When I use the term will, ” writes Basilides, “I do so merely to suggest the idea of 
an operation transcending all volition, thought, or sensible action. ” 9S 

2. God’s Energy, or Self-realization, is, then, His Will (Oskqcnq); His Essence 
(ohm a) or Substance is “to will the being of all things”; in brief, He is the Very 
Subsistence (bna of all - a term which subsequently came into great 
prominence in the later Platonic philosophy. 

3. In § 3 we have a clear distinction drawn between the transcendent idea of God 
as Creator or Wilier, and the ordinary conception of God as Maker or Fabricator or 
Demiurge - a distinction that meets us in almost every Gnostic system. In our 
treatise, however, there is no setting of the one idea over against the other in any 
sense of antagonism. It is only stated that the self-operation of Deity transcends all 
such limited conceptions as that of a Maker or Fabricator. 

OF GNOSIS AND ECSTASIS 

4. The distinctive feature of God as the Good, or the Desirable, the Supreme 
Consummation, is “that He should be known” (to yvooqiCsaOcu); in other words, the 
science of all sciences is the Gnosis of God. 

5. The Vision Glorious, the One Sight, is next spoken of under the simile of the 
shining of a Ray of the Light and Life of the Spiritual Sun into the mind. This 


98 Hipp., Philos., vii. 21 (ed. D. and S., p. 358); F. F. F., pp. 257, 258. 


- 103 - 



consummation of Ecstasis", we are told, was a transcending of the limitations of 
body, and was a faculty possessed by the forebears ( fipoyovoi ) of the “race” into 
which Hermes and now Tat are being born; these ancestors are mentioned under 
symbolic Greek names, evidently a substitute for Egyptian ones, for the reference is 
clearly to the priesthood of some past civilization of the Nile Land. At the same 
time, it can be referred to certain grades of super-men, regarded as gods, who had 
reached to certain stages of celestial dignity 100 . 

To this idea of ancient Masters of the Gnosis in Egypt, Lactantius refers as 
follows: 

“And so it appears that he [Cronus] was not born from Heaven (which is 
impossible j, but from that man who was called Uranus; and that this is so, 
Trismegistus bears witness, when, in stating that there have been very few in whom the 
pefect science has been found, he mentioned in their number Uranus, Cronus, and 
Hermes his kinsfolk. ” 101 

Lactantius seems to be somewhat under the fascination of the theory of 
Euhemerus, and has no credence in the Heaven-born, in spite of the Christ Birth. 
We, however, learn from him that he knew of a statement by Hermes in this 
connection in which, besides Uranus and Cronus, an ancient Hermes was 
mentioned. Now in our treatise this is not the case, and Tat and not Hermes is the 
speaker; whereas in P. S. A., xxxvii., where Hermes speaks of his progenitor 
Hermes, no mention is made of Uranus and Cronus. Therefore Lactantius refers to 
a lost treatise of Hermes. 


OF APOTHEOSIS 

6. The nature of Ecstasy is then further explained; it is the fruit of meditation or 
contemplation, the consummation of the Theoretic Life. 

“The Gnosis of the Good is holy silence and a giving holiday (xazagyla) to every 
sense. ” 

The Holy Silence reminds us of the Sige of the Christian Gnostics; here, 
however, instead of the Mother-fEon of Cosmos, it is used in the sense of the pure 
mother-nature of the little cosmos of man, the divine womb that brings to birth the 
true man. 

With this may be compared C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 2: 

‘Wisdom conceived by mind in silence, such is the matter and the womb from out 
which man is bom, and the true Good the seed. ” 

It is hardly necessary to add that this is the Yoga of the Upanishads. Indeed, the 
first part of § 6 might be taken word for word from those sublime treatises of 
Vaidik theosophy, and shows how identical is the thought of those who have first- 
hand experience of the higher consciousness. 


99 Cf. § 25, where ecstasis is explained as an extension of consciousness, - a certain “greatness” (|xsys0o<;). 

100 See the “Chart of Orphic Cosmogony,” facing p. 87 of my Orpheus (London, 1896), where Uranus and Cronus 
are referred to the two lower of the three Noetic “planes” transcending the Sensible Universe. 

101 Div. Institt., i. 11 (ed. Fritz., i. 29, 30). 


- 104 - 



“For it is possible, my son, that a man’s soul should be made like to God 
(&7io0soo0rjvcu), e’en while it still is in a body, if it doth contemplate the Beauty of 
the Good.” 

This is the “deification” (anoOeaxJiq), or “apotheosis” of a man; he becomes like 
unto God, in that he becomes a god. The Beauty of the Good is the Cosmic Order; 
and the mode of this meditation was to bring the soul into sympathy with the 
Cosmic Soul. 


THE METAMORPHOSES OF THE SOUL 

7. The secret of this divine operation (or theurgy) is based upon the fact that the 
soul can be transformed into every likeness. The Great Likeness of God is the 
Cosmic Order, the making oneself into this Likeness is the supreme transformation 
or transfiguration of the soul. 

The separated or individual soul is in perpetual pilgrimage, revolving on the 
wheel of transformation. This doctrine was shared in by many other faiths, and it 
was also Egyptian. 

In this connection we may refer instructively to Hippolytus’ quotations from the 
Naassene Document (§ 3 S.): 

“And they 102 say that the soul is very difficult to discover, and hard to understand; 
for it never remains of the same appearance, or form, or in the same state, so that ive 
can describe it by a general type, or comprehend it by an essential quality. ” 

On this Hippolytus comments: 

‘These variegated metamorphoses they 103 have laid down in the Gospel superscribed 
‘According to the Egyptians. 

The Gospel according to the Egyptians is lost, with the exception of a few fragments. 
We, however, here learn that it described the metamorphoses of the soul. It was a 
Gospel having its origin in Egypt and suited to Egyptian modes of thought. It 
follows, therefore, that the doctrine of the soul’s transformation was Egyptian 104 . 

THE LADDER OF BEING 

The Hermetic doctrine of the evolution of the soul, by means of multitudinous 
transformations, is characterised by certain main moments, for in the course of it it 
passes through definite stages of existence designated as animal, human, daimonic, 
and god-like; there being, further, two grades of being within the choir of gods - 
the errant and inerrant. The final stage is the most perfect glory (86%x) or power of 
the soul. 

With all of this there is a strikingly exact parallel of ideas in the Pauline Letters. 


102 The quotation is from the text of the Hellenistic Commentator, who is referring to the Chaldasans. 

103 The Gnostics Hippolytus calls the Naassenes. 

104 Reitzenstein (p. 22, 2) says that it was in error that the Greeks stated the Egyptians believed in metempsychosis; in 
this I believe that Reitzenstein is himself in error. The Egyptians at any rate demonstrably believed in soul 
metamorphosis; and when we find people who lived in Egypt teaching this metamorphosis in connection with 
metempsychosis, it is but natural to conclude that the Greeks, who were in touch with the living tradition of Egypt, 
knew more about the matter than modern scepticism. 


- 105 - 



“But some one will say: How do the dead rise, and with what body do they come [? 
back]? 

“Thou foolish one! That which thou sowest is not made quick unless it die. 

“And that which thou sowest - ’tis not the body that shall be thou sowest, but a 
naked grain of wheat or of one of the other seeds 105 . 

“Tis God that gives to it 106 a body as he will, -yea to every one of the seeds its 
proper body. 

“Not every flesh is the same flesh; but there is one of men, another flesh of beasts, 
another flesh of birds, and another of fishes. 

‘There are also bodies celestial, as well as bodies terrestrial. But the glory of the 
celestial [bodies] is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. 

“[And of the former] the glory of the sun is one, and the glory of the moon is 
another, and [yet] another is the glory of the stars; for star dijfereth from star in glory. 

“So also is the resurrection of the dead. ” 107 

And by “resurrection of the dead,” I believe that Paul meant what all the 
instructed of the time meant - namely, the “reaching the first step of 
deathlessness,” as Hermes has it in our treatise. The death or vice of the soul is 
ignorance, the virtue or life of the soul is Gnosis. 

“For he who knows, he good and pious is, and still while on the earth, divine. ” 

CONCERNING TRANSMIGRATION 

8. With § 8, however, we are confronted with what appears to be a great 
difficulty. Hermes here seems to teach distinctly that a vicious (that is, an ignorant) 
soul, one who has not attained to Gnosis, goes back to attachment to animal 
bodies, while in §§ 19 ff., he at great length denies that a human soul can possibly 
do so. Is there any solution of this apparently complete self-contradiction in one 
and the same treatise? 

Far as I am from desiring to play the apologist for any scripture, I am prevented 
from appending an impatient “No” to this query, for the following considerations: 

In the first place, Hermes in § 8 is speaking of the vicious or ignorant soul, while 
in § 19 he is speaking not only of the “human” soul, but of the human soul that 
hath the Good Mind (§ 23); whereas the ignorant soul “doth not have Mind, and, 
therefore, such an one should not be called a man ” (§ 24). Here, then, we have a 
fundamental distinction in souls incarnated into the “body of a man” (§ 8); they are 
of two classes. 

The doctrine of § 8 applies to one class, the doctrine of § 19 to another. 

Metempsychosis, in the sense of continued revolution on the wheel of life and 
death, is only for him who “persisted! in his vice” - that is to say, is still ignorant. 
Gnosis thus means the freedom from samsdra, to use a common Brahmanical and 
Buddhistic term. 


105 The “grain of mustard seed” 

106 Sc. the soul as grain. 


107 1 Cor. xv. 35-42. 


“wheat” if a good body comes therefrom, “tares” if an imperfect growth results. 


- 106 - 



The ignorant soul does not see the Light, being “blinded by the body’s passions, 
and tossed about”; this is the “turmoil” of which Plato speaks in the T imams. 

And here I must refer the reader to “Plato Concerning Metempsychosis,” in the 
“Prolegomena,” a chapter which I have written mainly in elucidation of the 
problems raised by our treatise. 

GNOSIS THE VIRTUE OF THE SOUL 

9. So much, then, for the soul which persisteth in its vice or ignorance; but the 
virtue of the soul is Gnosis. 

“F or he who knows, he good and pious is, and still while on the earth, divine. ” 

This is precisely the same idea as that of the JIvanmukta in Indian theosophy - 
namely, the man who has reached Mukti or Liberation while still living in the body. 

Hermes thus proceeds to distinguish Gnosis, the end of human science, from 
sense or opinion. Gnosis is the apotheosis of the mind, its immediate perception of 
the things-that-are - namely, the Intelligible Cosmos. 

1 1 . The Sensible or Hylic Cosmos is then explained, and also the nature of man, 
and his relationship to the Cosmos and God. 

THE VEHICLES OF THE SOUL 

13. The vehicles of man’s “Soul” are then categorized 8e dvOpdmou o^sixai 

tOv tqouov Tohiov), the Soul being here used in the sense of the Self, and as 
distinguished from the “soul” in the category. They are as follows, one within the 
other, in the sense of being respectively more intimate to the true nature of man: 

Mind (vovq); reason (Xoy oq); soul (rpu^zr]); spirit (Ttvsbjioc); body (ctCOjioc). 

The remarkable similarity of this category with the psychology of the 
Upanishads cannot fail to strike the student of those mother-treatises of Vaidik 
theosophy. Thus we read in the Kathopanishad, I. iii. 10, 11: 

“Beyond the senses are the rudiments (m ; beyond the rudiments wfiulsive mind; 
beyond the mind, the reason; beyond the reason, the Great Self. 

‘Beyond the Great, the Increate 109 i; beyond the Increate, the Man 1,0 i; beyond the 
Man, not any thing ; That is the goal; That is the final end. ” 

The analogy is striking. Body = gross elements; spirit = subde elements; soul = 
impulsive mind (manas); reason = reason ( buddhi m ); Mind = the Great (Mahal); 
Source (ct^pf]) = the Increate; the One and Only (to 8v xod povov) = the Man. 

These so-called “vehicles,” “envelopes,” or “sheaths” ( koshas ), are elsewhere 
given in the Upanishads as: anna-maya-kosha - that is, the kosha composed of, or 
resulting from, food (body); prana-may a-k., of life (spirit); mano-maya-k., of impulse 
(soul); vijnana-maya-k., of discrimination (reason); ananda-maya-k., of bliss (Mind). 


108 The subtler elements. 

109 Avyakta, undifferentiated cosmic substance, 
no p urus f, a , the Tme Man. 

111 The warns and bnddhi of the Upanishads are not to be confounded with these terms as at present employed in 
modem Theosophical literature. 


- 107 - 


“Spirit” is thus seen to correspond to life (prana)', it is that which “bestows upon 
the living creature motion, and, as it were, doth bear it” (i.e. support it) “in a way” 
(§ 13). It is not Life, but individualized life, and in the Aupanishad literature is 
differentiated into five modes, which may be almost translated as etheric currents 
or modes of motion in the body 112 . 

The quotation from Proclus in “Plato Concerning Metempsychosis,” will have 
sufficiently shown that this “life” is of the same nature as the animal life. It is that 
principle of soul which man shares with the animals. 

THE DUAL SOUL 

And here we may refer to Jamblichus (De Myst ., viii. 6), when referring to the 
“Hermaic writings” he says: 

“Man has two souls, as these writings say. The one is from the first Mind, and 
partakes also of the power of the Creator, while the other, the soul under constraint, 
comes from the revolution of the celestial [spheres]; into the latter the former, the soul 
that is the seer of God 11 ] insinuates itself at a later period. 

‘ This being so, the soul that descends into us from the worlds [or spheres] keeps 
time with the circuit of these worlds, while the soul from the Mind existing in us in an 
intelligible fashion is free from the whirl of genesis; by this the bonds of Destiny are 
burst asunder; by this the Path up to the Gods whom mind alone can see is brought to 
birth ; by such a life as this is that Great Art Divine, which leads us up to That 
beyond the spheres of genesis, brought to its consummation. ” 

Hermes in our treatise is, however, more precise as to the so-called “vehicles” or 
“souls,” for he writes (§ 17): 

‘Mind taketh, then, the soul for, as it were, an envelope. And soul itself being, too, 
a thing divine 114 , doth use the spirit as its envelope, while spirit doth pervade the 
living creature. ” 115 


“HE WHO STANDS” 

The Supreme Principle of all, the One and Only One, who “standeth 
perpetually” (§ 14), is the Intelligible Logos (f] voqifj manic, f. § 11), the 6 em(bc of 
the Christianized Gnosis, as seen especially in the Simonian Great Announcement. He 
is the Cause of the perpetual motion of the Hylic Cosmos. Compare this with the 
following passage of Numenius: 

“Now there are two modes of life, the first of the First and the second of the Second 
God. For it is evident that the First God should be standing (sard>g), and the 
Second, on the contrary, moved. The First, then, is occupied about things intelligible, 
and the Second about things intelligible and sensible. 

“Marvel not that I say this; for thou shalt hear what is still more marvellous. For 
I say that it is not the motion that appertains to the Second, but the rest that pertains 


112 Cf. K. K., 44, 45, Comment. 

113 Cf. C. H., ix. (x.) 3: “The daimon who’s illumined by God’s Light.” 

114 That is, being logos, as from the Creator or Second Mind. 

115 Cf. Exx. iv. 2; xv. 2; xix. 3; and Frag, xviii. 


- 108 - 



to the First, which is the innate ‘ motion ’from which both their cosmic order and their 
eternal community and their preservation [or salvation] is poured forth on things 
universal. ” 116 


THE OLYMPIAN PATH 

15. In § 15 the Gnosis is again declared to be the only Path of Salvation or 

Safety 11 . It is the Way Up to the Mount 118 , the Olympian Path. 

The term Eleusis was also interpreted as Anabasis, or the Way Up 119 . Compare 

the Jewish commentator in the Naassene Document (§ 27): 

‘First is the Mystery called Fleusis’ and Anaktoreion ’ - Eleusis because we come 
1 20 121 

from Above , streaming down from Adamas , . . . and Anaktoreion from 
‘Returning Above. ’ ” 


“WHEN MIND BECOMES A DAIMON” 

16. The next main doctrine touched on is one of immense importance, for it 
gives us the inner teaching which illuminates the “dark saying” in the “Poemandres” 
(§ 24), when treating of the Way Up (& ,vo8oq): 

“And thou surrenderest thy way of life unto the daimon. ” 

For in our treatise Hermes tells us that at death: 

“The mind stript of its wrappings, and naturally divine, taking unto itself a fiery 
body, doth traverse every space, after abandoning the soul unto its judgment and 
whatever chastisement it hath deserved. ” 

The key to this is the sentence (§ 21): 

“When mind becomes a daimon, the law requires that it should take a fiery body 
to execute the services of God. ” 

At death, the mind, of its own nature, perforce becomes a “servant of God,” a 
Therapeut 1 " 2 ; the man is his own judge and his own chastizer. 

The “fire of hell” is then but the reflection of the light of the mind; it is the 
burning remorse of a mind that now sees the inevitable results of every selfish 
action - thought, word, and deed; that each of these comes inevitably back on the 
sender forth of it. 

The soul, thus, lives out (and that too in the most realistic fashion, it realises the 
actuality of the law in all its most minute details) the inevitable consequences of its 
past vicious deeds in body. 


116 Quoted by Eusebius, Prop. Evang., XI. xviii. 20, 21 (539 B), ed. Dindorf (Leipzig, 1867), ii. 41. We do not know 
Numenius’ date, but it was probably about the first half of the first century A.D. Though Numenius is almost 
invariably designated as a Pythagorean, he was rather a universalist, for his object was not only to trace the doctrines 
of Plato up to Pythagoras, but to show that they were not at variance with the doctrines and mysteries of the 
Brahmans, Jews, Magi and Egyptians. 

117 Cf. the passage from Jamblichus quoted above. 

118 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 1: “The Passing o’er the Mount.” 

119 Cf. C. H, i. 24. 

120 Eleusis meaning Coming, Advent. 

121 The Man or Mind. 

122 Cf. 23: “The mind in service.” 


- 109 - 



Here we have the hint of a psychology and of an inner teaching that persuades 
us there was a profound wisdom at the back of the intermediate instruction of 
these schools. 

Compare this most reasonable theory of after-death “illumination” with the 
crudities of the eternal torment idea of popular religion with which we are so 
familiar, and reflect on what a “falling off’ there has been from the Gnosis of the 
early days. 

And what is the “fiery body” of the mind but the ray-like or starry vehicle of the 
man, the ocbyosidst; f\ daxposiheq of Philoponus? 12 ’ 

This is the true “Astral Body” of a man, and not the “watery vesture” which is 
referred to under the term in modern nomenclature. 

This is the true Body of Purification, that burns up all impurities, and in the light 
of the conflagration burns into man the memory of the Gnosis. 

The soul is thus “chastised by its own self’; and if Hermes had taught us nothing 
else, he would have amply deserved the gratitude of humanity, and the title of 
Thrice-greatest. Yet is “Hermes” no single man, but a mind illuminated by the 
Mind. 


THE “SCOURGE” OF THE CHRIST 

21. So then “the impious soul, scourged widi its own sins, is plunged in murders, 
outrage, blasphemy, in violence of all kinds, and all the other things whereby 
mankind is wronged.” 

This is the “scourge” by which the Christ drives the unworthy out of His 
Temple. It does not mean that the soul is driven into doing these things, but that it 
is made to realize or suffer them - the consequences of its prior misdeeds. Whatever 
wrong it has done to its fellows, such it suffers, in the realization of its true nature, 
whereby the Light of Gnosis brings into amazing contrast the darkness or 
ignorance of its past actions 124 . 

THE DISPENSATION OF THE UNIVERSE 

22. And so Hermes explains the nature of “the dispensation of the universe” - 
the interlinking of the grades of being from God downwards the intercourse or 
communion of souls. 

God, Cosmos and Man are grades of being. Each is a sun, as it were, in their 
operations, or powers or rays. God’s rays are His energies or self-realizing 
operations; those of Cosmos are the natures of things, those of Man are the arts 
and sciences. 

This communion or intercourse of higher with lower natures is to be realized on 
the side of man by the consummation of the sacred marriage, whereby man 
becomes a god, and finally God. 


123 See my Orpheus, pp. 292 ff. 

124 With this compare the function of the Mind on the soul in incarnation, as described in C. H., xii. (xiii.) 4. 


- 110 - 



He only is blessed who is filled with God - that is to say, the true Gnostic who 
has received the consecration of the Fullness or Pleroma 125 . 

Whereas the soul that is empty of God is deprived of that Fullness, cut off from 
it, and so empty of the Mind. This is the state of Emptiness (hsvoojicc) or 
Insufficiency (baidqypa). 

24. Such souls, says Hermes, should not be called men. For a true man is not only 
equal to a god, but even higher than the gods. Such a man we should, in Christian 
nomenclature, call a Christ - one animated or illuminated by the Mind or Spirit of 
God. 


125 Cf. John i. 16: “Of His Fullness have we all received.” 


- Ill - 



+- - » 

CORPUS HERMETICUM XI. (XII.) 

MIND UNTO HERMES 
(Text: P. 85-99; Pat. 20b-23.) 

1 . Mind. 

ASTER this sermon [logos) 1 , then, Thrice- 
greatest Hermes, and bear in mind the spoken 
words; and as it hath come unto Me to speak, I 
will no more delay. 

Hermes. As many men say many things, and these diverse, 
about the All and Good, I have not learned the truth. 
Make it, then, clear to me, O Master mine! For I can trust 
the explanation of these things, which comes from Thee 
alone. 

2. Mind. Hear [then], My son, how standeth God and All. 

God; fEon 2 ; Cosmos; Time; Becoming 1 . 

God maketh fEon; fEon, Cosmos; Cosmos, Time; and 
Time, Becoming. 

The Good, - the Beautiful, Wisdom, Blessedness, - is 
essence, as it were 4 5 , of God; of fEon, Sameness 3 ; of 
Cosmos, Order; of Time, Change; and of Becoming, Life 
and Death. 

The energies of God are Mind and Soul; of fEon, 
lastingness 6 and deathlessness; of Cosmos, restoration and 
the opposite thereof 7 ; of Time, increase and decrease; and 
of Becoming, quality. 

fEon is, then, in God; Cosmos, in fEon; in Cosmos, Time; 
in Time, Becoming. 



1 Or thy reason. 

2 Eternity; the ideal world, beyond time. Cf. P. i". A ., xxx, xxxi. 

3 Genesis. 

4 That is to say, the term “ess-e nee” cannot really be applied to God, for He is beyond “fe-ing.” 

5 Or identity. 

6 Or duration. 

7 a.vza.KOX.amomoi<;. 


- 112 - 



/Eon stands firm round God; Cosmos is moved in /Eon; 
Time hath its limits 8 in the Cosmos; Becoming doth 
become in Time. 

3. The source 9 , therefore, of all is God; their essence, 
/Eon; their matter, Cosmos. 

God’s power is /Eon; /Eon’s work is Cosmos - which 
never hath become, yet ever doth become by /Eon. 

Therefore will Cosmos never be destroyed, for /Eon’s 
indestructible; nor doth a whit of things in Cosmos perish, 
for Cosmos is enwrapped by /Eon round on every side. 

Her. But God’s Wisdom - what is that? 

Mind. The Good and Beautiful, and Blessedness, and 
Virtue’s all, and /Eon. 

/Eon, then, ordereth 10 [Cosmos], imparting deathlessness 
and lastingness to matter. 

4. For its 11 becoming doth depend on /Eon, as /Eon doth 
on God. 

Now Genesis 12 and Time, in Heaven and on the Earth, 
are of two natures. 

In Heaven they are unchangeable and indestructible, but 
on the Earth they’re subject unto change and to 
destruction. 

Further, the /Eon’s soul is God; the Cosmos’ soul is /Eon; 
the Earth’s soul, Heaven. 

And God’s in Mind; and Mind, in Soul; and Soul, in 
Matter; and all of them through /Eon. 

But all this Body 1 ’, in which are all the bodies, is full of 
Soul; and Soul is full of Mind, and [Mind] of God. 

It 14 fills it 15 from within, and from without encircles it, 
making the All to live. 


8 Or is accomplished. 

9 TtriY?]. 

10 Or adometh. 

11 Sc. Matter’s Becoming or Genesis. 

12 Or Becoming. 

13 Sc. Cosmos. 


- 113 - 



Without, this vast and perfect Life 16 [encircles] Cosmos; 
within, it fills [it with] all lives 17 ; above, in Heaven, 
continuing in sameness; below, on Earth, changing 
becoming. 

5. And fEon doth preserve this [Cosmos], or by Necessity, 
or by Foreknowledge, or by Nature, or by whatever else a 
man supposes or shall suppose. And all is this, - God 
energizing. 

The Energy of God is Power that naught can e’er surpass, 
a Power with which no one can make comparison of any 
human thing at all, or any thing divine. 

Wherefore, O Hermes, never think that aught of things 
above or things below is like to God, for thou wilt fall 
from truth. For naught is like to That which hath no like, 
and is Alone and One. 

And do not ever think that any other can possibly possess 
His power; for what apart from Him is there of life, and 
deathlessness and change of quality? For what else should 
He make? 18 

God’s not inactive 19 , since all things [then] would lack 
activity; for all are full of God. 

But neither in the Cosmos anywhere, nor in aught else, is 
there inaction. For that “inaction” is a name that cannot 
be applied to either what doth make or what is made 20 . 

6. But all things must be made; both ever made, and also 
in accordance with the influence of every space 21 . 

For He who makes, is in them all; not stablished 22 in some 
one of them, nor making one thing only, but making all. 


14 Sc. Soul. 

15 Sc. Body, of Universe or Cosmos. 

16 Or Animal; that is, Soul. 

17 Or animals. 

18 Sc. than those which are Himself. 

19 OQyoc,. There is a word-play in the terms egyov (work), evegy&v (working in, energizing), evsQyrjt; (active, energetic), 
Evsgysioc (in-working, activity), and aQybq (not-working, inactive, idle), agyia (inactivity, idleness), which it is 
impossible to bring out fully in English. 

20 Or what becomes. 

21 This seems to mean, that all things in the world of genesis (making, creating, or becoming) have their root-activity, 
first from the sameness of becoming of the one sphere or space, and then their differentiated activity from the seven 
spheres, spaces, or planes, which are the instruments of God in the differentiation of the Cosmos. 


- 114 - 



For being Power, He energiseth in the things He makes 
and is not independent of them, - although the things He 
makes are subject to Him. 

Now gaze through Me 21 upon the Cosmos that’s now 
subject to thy sight; regard its Beauty carefully - Body in 
pure perfection, though one than which there’s no more 
ancient one, ever in prime of life, and ever-young, nay, 
rather, in even fuller and yet fuller prime! 

7. Behold, again, the seven subject Worlds 24 ; ordered 20 by 
/Fon’s order 26 , and with their varied course full-fil li ng 
TEon! 

[See how] all things [are] full of light, and nowhere [is 
there] fire; for ’tis the love and blending of the contraries 
and the dis similars that doth give birth to light down 
shining by the energy of God 27 , the Father of all good, the 
Leader of all order, and Ruler of the seven world- 
orderings! 

[Behold] the Moon, forerunner of them all, the instrument 
of nature, and the transmuter of its lower matter! 

[Look at] the Earth set in the midst of All, foundation of 
the Cosmos Beautiful, feeder and nurse of things on 
Earth! 

And contemplate the multitude of deathless lives, how 
great it is, and that of lives subject to death; and midway, 
between both, immortal [lives] and mortal, [see thou] the 
circling Moon. 

8. And all are full of Soul, and all are moved by it, each in 
its proper way; some round the Heaven, others around the 
Earth; [see] how the right [move] not unto left, nor yet the 
left unto the right; nor the above below, nor the below 
above. 


22 [Ed. probably meaning established] 

23 Mind - i.e. with the mind’s eye, or spiritual sight, or by the help of the Master’s illuminating power. Cf. C. H., i. 7 
and xiii. (xiv.) 11. 

24 Koapou?, cosmoi or world-orders. 

25 Or adorned, or made beautiful. 

26 The order of the iEon (Eternity, the Spiritual Space), asonian or everlasting order. 

27 The text from “Now gaze . . .” to here is given in R. 36, n. 1. 


- 115 - 



And that all these are subject unto Genesis 28 , My dearest 
Hermes, thou hast no longer need to learn of Me. For that 
they bodies are, have souls, and they are moved. 

But ’tis impossible for them to come together into one 
without some one to bring them [all] together. It must, 
then, be that such a one as this must be some one who’s 
wholly One. 

9. For as the many motions of them [all] are different, and 
as their bodies are not like, yet has one speed been 
ordered for them all, it is impossible that there should be 
two or more makers for them. 

For that one single order is not kept among “the many”; 
but rivalry will follow of the weaker with the stronger, and 
they will strive. 

And if the maker of the lives that suffer change and death, 
should be another 29 , he would desire to make the 
deathless ones as well; just as the maker of the deathless 
ones, [to make the lives] that suffer death. 

But come! if there be two ’ 0 , - if Matter’s one, and Soul is 
one, in whose hands would there be the distribution’ 1 for 
the making? Again, if both of them have some of it, in 
whose hands may there be the greater part? 

10. But thus conceive it, then; that every living body doth 
consist of soul and matter, whether [that body be] of an 
immortal, or a mortal, or an irrational [life] . 

For that all living bodies are ensouled; whereas, upon the 
other hand, those that live not, are matter by itself. 

And, in like fashion, Soul when in its self is, after its own 
maker, cause of life; but the cause of all life is He who 
makes the things that cannot die. 

Her. How, then, is it that, first, lives subject unto death are 
other than the deathless ones? And, next, how is it that 


28 Or becoming. 

29 From the maker of the immortals. 

30 Sc. makers. 

31 Sc. of matter and life. 


- 116 - 



that Life which knows no death, and maketh 
deathlessness, doth not make animals immortal? 

11. Mind. First, that there is some one who does these 
things, is clear; and, next, that He is also One, is very 
manifest. For, also, Soul is one, and Life is one, and 
Matter one. 

Her. But who is He? 

Mind. Who may it other be than the One God? Whom 
else should it beseem to put Soul into lives but God 
alone? One, then, is God. 

It would indeed be most ridiculous, if when thou dost 
confess the Cosmos to be one. Sun one. Moon one, and 
Godhead’ 2 one, thou shouldst wish God Himself to be 
some one or other of a number! 

12. All things, therefore. He makes, in many [ways]. And 
what great thing is it for God to make life, soul, and 
deathlessness, and change, when thou [thyself] dost do” 
so many things? 

For thou dost see, and speak, and hear, and smell, and 
taste, and touch, and walk, and think, and breathe. And it 
is not one man who smells, a second one who speaks, a 
third who touches, another one who smells, another one 
who walks, another one who thinks, and [yet] another one 
who breathes. But one is he who doth all these. 

And yet no one of these could be apart from God. For 
just as, shouldst thou cease from’ 4 these, thou wouldst no 
longer be a living thing, so also, should God cease from 
them (a thing not law to say), no longer is He God. 

13. For if it hath been shown that no thing can inactive” 
be, how much less God? For if there’s aught He doth not 
make (if it be law to say), He is imperfect. But if He is not 
only not inactive, but perfect [God], then He doth make 
all things. 

32 Or Divinity. 

33 Or make; a play on the double meaning of the Greek verb. 

34 Lit. become inactive of (xaxagYr]0fj<;). 

35 A word has here dropped out in the text, which I have supplied by (inactive), and not by the usual 

conjecture “apart from God.” 


- 117 - 



Give thou thyself to Me, My Hermes, for a little while 16 , 
and thou shalt understand more easily how that God’s 
work is one, in order that all things may be - that are being 
made, or once have been, or that are going to be made. 
And this 7 ’ 1 is, My beloved, Life; this is the Beautiful; this is 
the Good; this, God. 

14. And if them wouldst in practice’ 8 understand [this 
work], behold what taketh place with thee desiring to 
beget. Yet this is not like unto that, for He doth not enjoy. 

For that indeed He hath no other one to share in what He 
works, for working by Himself, He ever is at work, 
Himself being what He doth’ 9 . For did He separate 
Himself from it 40 , all things would [then] collapse, and all 
must die, Life ceasing. 

But if all things are lives, and also Life is one; then, one is 
God. And, furthermore, if all are lives, both those in 
Heaven and those on Earth, and One Life in them all is 
made to be by God, and God is it 41 - then, all are made by 
God. 

Life is the making-one of Mind and Soul; accordingly 
Death is not the destruction of those that are at-oned 42 , 
but the dissolving of their union. 

15. FEon, moreover, is God’s image; Cosmos [is] fEon’s; 
the Sun, of Cosmos; and Man, [the image] of the Sun. 

The people call change death, because the body is 
dissolved, and life, when it’s dissolved, withdraws to the 
unmanifest. But in this sermon ( logos ), Hermes, my 
beloved, as thou dost hear, I say the Cosmos also suffers 
change, - for that a part of it each day is made to be in the 
unmanifest, - yet it is ne’er dissolved. 


36 Cf. P. J. A., iii. 1: “Now lend to me the whole of thee.” 

37 Sc. work, doing, making, or creating. 

38 Eqy®, in deed, in work. 

39 Or makes. 

40 Sc. His work, or creation. 

41 1 this life. 

42 That is, Mind and Soul, sc. the Logos and World-Soul, or ego and animal soul. 


- 118 - 



These are the passions of the Cosmos - revolvings and 
concealments; revolving is conversion and concealment 
renovation. 

16. The Cosmos is all-formed, - not having forms external 
to itself, but changing them itself within itself. Since, then, 
Cosmos is made to be all-formed, what may its maker be? 
For that, on the one hand, He should not be void of all 
form; and, on the other hand, if He’s all-formed, He will 
be like the Cosmos. Whereas, again, has He a single form, 
He will thereby be less than Cosmos. 

What, then, say we He is? - that we may not bring round 
our sermon (logos) into doubt; for naught that mind 
conceives of God is doubtful. 

He, then, hath one idea \ which is His own alone, which 
doth not fall beneath the sight, being bodiless, and [yet] by 
means of bodies manifesteth all [ideas] 44 . And marvel not 
that there’s a bodiless idea. 

17. For it is like the form of reason (Jogos) A5 and mountain- 
tops in pictures 46 . For they appear to stand out strongly 
from the rest, but really are quite smooth and flat. 

And now consider what is said more boldly, but more 
truly! 

Just as man cannot live apart from Life, so neither can 
God live without [His] doing good 47 . For this is as it were 
the life and motion as it were of God - to move all things 
and make them live. 

18. Now some of the things said 48 should bear a sense 
peculiar to themselves. So understand, for instance, what 
I’m going to say. 


43 The root of form; used also loosely in Greek to denote form. 

44 Or forms. 

45 Or idea of the sermon. 

46 xai ev rat; ygatpat; axgwgeiai. All the translators talk of “margins” in MSS., and make entire nonsense of the 
passage. I can find absolutely no authority for translating axgwgeiai margins. 

47 Or making the Good; that is, iEon. 

48 Or points of the sermon. 


- 119 - 



All are in God, [but] not as lying in a place. For place is 
both a body and immovable, and things that lie do not 
have motion. 

Now things lie one way in the bodiless, another way in 
being made manifest. 

Think, [then,] of Him who doth contain them all; and 
think, that than the bodiless naught is more 
comprehensive, or swifter, or more potent, but it is the 
most comprehensive, the swiftest, and most potent of 
them all. 

19. And, thus, think from thyself, and bid thy soul go unto 
any land; and there more quickly than thy bidding will it 
be. And bid it journey oceanwards; and there, again, 
immediately ’twill be, not as if passing on from place to 
place, but as if being there. 

And bid it also mount to heaven; and it will need no 
wings, nor will aught hinder it, nor fire of sun, nor aether, 
nor vortex- swirl 49 , nor bodies of the other stars; but, 
cutting through them all, it will soar up to the last Body 
[of them all] 50 . And shouldst thou will to break through 
this as well, and contemplate what is beyond - if there be 
aught beyond the Cosmos 51 ; it is permitted thee. 

20. Behold what power, what swiftness, thou dost have! 
And canst thou do all of these things, and God not [do 
them] ? 

Then, in this way know' 2 God; as having all things in 
Himself as thoughts, the whole Cosmos itself. 

If, then, thou dost not make thyself like unto God, thou 
canst not know Him. For like is knowable to like [alone]. 

Make, [then,] thyself to grow to the same stature as the 
Greatness which transcends all measure; leap forth from 


49 f] 8 ivt], presumably the vortex or “whorl” of the solar system (cf. “Vision of Er”). 

50 Sc. the body or limit of the whole cosmos. 

51 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 5: “And things above the heaven - if there be aught.” 

52 Or think. 


- 120 - 



every body; transcend all Time; become Eternity 53 ; and 
[thus] shalt thou know God. 

Conceiving nothing is impossible unto thyself, think 
thyself deathless and able to know all, - all arts, all 
sciences, the way of every life 34 . 

Become more lofty than all height, and lower than all 
depth. Collect into thyself all senses of [all] creatures, - of 
fire, [and] water, dry and moist. Think that thou art at the 
same time in every place, - in earth, in sea, in sky; not yet 
begotten, in the womb, young, old, [and] dead, in after- 
death conditions 33 . 

And if thou knowest all these things at once 56 , - times, 
places, doings, qualities, and quantities; thou canst know 
God 57 . 

21. But if thou lockest up thy soul within thy body, and 
dost debase it, saying: I nothing know; I nothing can; I 
fear the sea; I cannot scale the sky; I know not who I was, 
who I shall be; - what is there [then] between [thy] God 
and thee? 

For thou canst know naught of things beautiful and good 
so long as thou dost love thy body and art bad. 

The greatest bad there is, is not to know God’s Good 38 ; 
but to be able to know [Good], and will, and hope, is a 
Straight Way, the Good’s own [Path], both leading there 
and easy 39 . 

If thou but sett’st thy foot thereon, ’twill meet thee 
everywhere, ’twill everywhere be seen, both where and 
when thou dost expect it not, - waking, sleeping, sailing, 
journeying, by night, by day, speaking, [and] saying 
naught. For there is naught that is not image of the Good. 

22. Her. Is God unseen? 


53 Lit. iEon. 

54 TiavtO? Craou r|0og, - or nature of every animal. 

55 QIC H.jxiii. (xiv.) 11. 

56 Or art simultaneously conscious of. 

57 A critical text from “Make, then, thy self’ to here is given by R., p. 238. 

58 to 0sTov - lit. the Godly, or Divine. 

59 Cf. Ex. i. 4. 


- 121 - 



Mind. Hush! Who is more manifest than He? For this one 
reason hath He made all things, that through them all 
thou mayest see Him. 

This is the Good of God, this [is] His Virtue, - that He 
may be made manifest through all 60 . 

For naught’s unseen , even of things that are without a 
body. Mind sees itself 61 in thinking, God in making 62 . 

So far these things have been made manifest to thee, 
Thrice-greatest one! Reflect on all the rest in the same way 
within thyself, and thou shalt not be led astray. 



COMMENTARY 


TITLE AND FORM 

The title in the MSS. is simply “Mind to Hermes.” When, therefore, Cyril, in 
quoting the first three paragraphs of § 22 of our treatise, says that Hermes wrote 
these words “to his own mind,” 61 he is evidendy either a very careless reader 64 , or 
had not seen at first hand the treatise from which he quotes. 

From its contents, moreover, it is very evident that our treatise, as far as its form 
is concerned, looks back to the “Poemandres” as the type of instruction to Hermes 
(or to a Hermes). 

This highly authoritative form of enunciating doctrine was evidently chosen 
because it was desired to impart a more intimate instruction than that of the 
“General Sermons” and the like, - to wit, the inculcation of the fEon-doctrine, in 
connection with the marvellous doctrine of At-one-ment with all tilings which 
constitutes the Path of the Good. The doctrine is no longer “Become (or make 
thyself like) Cosmos,” but “Become fEon” (§ 20). 

Now it is remarkable that the instruction given in our treatise by the Mind to 
Hermes is, almost point for point, the “esoteric” teaching of which the Sermon of 
Hermes to Tat, entitled the “Cup or Monad” - C. H., iv. (v.) - is the “exoteric” 
form. 

That the instruction in these Trismegistic schools of initiation was divided into 
grades is manifest on all sides; and, therefore, nothing is more natural than to find 
these two sermons standing in such intimate relations to one another as to 


60 The preceding question and answer is quoted with very slight verbal variants by Cyril, Contra Julianum , ii. 52. 

61 Or is seen. 

62 Or doing. 

63 C.Jul, ii. 52; ed. Migne, col. 580 B. 

M Cf. R. 128, i.; 196, 3. 


- 122 - 



doctrine, the one containing the more intimate and advanced explanation of the 
more general instruction of the other. 

And that this inner instruction on the “Cup” doctrine must have been thought 
to be of very great value, is evident when we reflect that “The Cup” sermon was 
one of the most famous of all the treatises of Hermes, for, as we have seen, its title 
was worth being plagiarized, and the Baptism of the Cup, of which it treated, 
constituted the goal of the endeavour of the disciples of the School, as Zosimus 
tells us. 

Mystically, then, the main interest of our treatise centres in the doctrine of the 
At-one-ment (as the inner consummation of the Baptism in the Cup or Monad), to 
which the /Ron -idea is but a formal introduction; historically, however, the 
introduction of the /Eon-idea presents itself as a critical problem, for the term is 
not found in the “Poemandres,” and, therefore, presumably was not used in the 
earliest documents of the School. 

THE 2E ON-LORE 

When, then, did this /Eon-idea impose itself upon the older form of tradition of 
the Trismegistic schools? This is a most important question; for if we can in any 
way answer it, we shall be in a position to assign a terminus ad quern for the earlier 
forms of Hermetic doctrine. 

The answer to the question seems to me to be involved in the supposition that 
the /Eon-doctrine must have influenced “Hermeticism” at more or less the same 
date as that at which it influenced “Gnosticism.” 

Now “Gnosticism,” in its Christianized forms, is practically never found without 
the /Eon-lore. 

The earliest forms of Christian Gnosis referred to by the later Patristic 
hcCresiologists are bound up with /Eonology. Not only so, but the very earliest 
reference to Gnosticism by any Christian writer presupposes the /Eon-doctrine, 
and uses it in illustration of the spiritual state of the writer 65 . 

The widespread influence of the /Eon-doctrine can thus be traced back to at 
least the origins of Christianity. 

Now as the Gnosis existed before any Christian form of it was developed, the 
question of the date when the /Eon-doctrine was introduced into it must be 
referred to pre-Christian times. 

And, indeed, the very simple character of the /Eon-lore in our treatise 66 , as 
compared with the mind-bewildering complexity and transcendency of first and 
second century Christian Gnosticism, is all in favour of an early date for its 
introduction into “Hermeticism,” which is only another name for “Gnosticism” of 
a preponderatingly Hellenic form. 

If this line of reasoning holds good, we have in it a very strong presumption that 
the older forms of the Trismegistic treatises were pre-Christian. 


65 Namely, Paul in his Letters, which are the earliest of all Christian documents. See my article, “Some Notes on the 
Gnostics,” in The Nineteenth Century and After (Nov. 1902), pp. 822-835; and D. J. L., pp. 353 ff. 

66 Perhaps the clearest exposition is to be found in P. S. A., xxx. and xxxi. 


- 123 - 



And that this is so may be seen by the absolute identity of the teaching of our 
treatise (§ 2) with that of Philo, when he writes: 

‘But God is the Artificer of Time as well For He is Father of its Father; and 
Time’s Father is the Cosmos, which manifests its motion in the genesis of Time. . . 

‘This [Cosmos] then, the Younger Son, the Sensible, being set a-moving has 
caused Time’s nature to appear and disappear; so that there nothing is which future is 
with God, who has the very Bounds of Time subject to Him. For ’ tis not Time, but 
Time’s Archetype and Paradigm, Eternity (or TEon), which is His Tfe 67 . But in 
Eternity naught is past, and naught is future, but all is present only. ” 68 

This passage of Philo is of the utmost importance for estimating the date of our 
treatises; for not only does it prove that the oldest forms of the Trismegistic 
literature were pre-Christian, but it further persuades us that our treatise, which 
belongs to a later type of this literature, may be dated as contemporary with Philo. 

Chapter xi. in the Prolegomena, “Concerning the fEon-Doctrine,” should be 
taken in close connection with this treatise, for it is not only introductory to it, but 
frequendy refers direcdy to it. 

For the rest, it is not necessary to attempt any detailed comments, since the 
instruction of the writer is clear enough for any careful reader to follow with ease 
after making himself acquainted with the general ideas in the preceding treatises. 
One or two notes on special points, however, may be attempted. 

THE ROOT OF FORM 

Thus in § 16, the sentence: “The Cosmos is all-formed (Ttavxopoppot;), - not 
having forms external to itself, but changing them itself within itself,” - reminds us 
of P. S. A., xix. 3: “The ‘Thirty-six’ who have the name of Horoscopes are in the 
self-same space as the fixed stars; of these the essence-chief, or prince, is he whom 
they call Pantomorph, or Omniform (Tcavidpoppoc, vel omnformis) ,wh < ) fashioneth 
the various forms for various species”; and also of P. S. A., xxxv.: “But they are 
changed as many times as there are moments in the hour of that revolving circle in 
which abides that God whom we have called All-form.” 

Compare also C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 12, where, speaking of the “Circle of the types of 
life,” Hermes says it is “composed of elements, twelve in number, but of one 
nature, an omniform idea.” 

With this compare Hermes-Prayer iv., addressed to Thoth as the Logos: 

‘Thee I invoke alone, thou who alone in all the Cosmos dost impose order on gods 
and men, who dost transform thyself in holy forms, making to be from things that are 
not, and from the things that are, making the not to be. ” 

But the main interest of our treatise is not that the Intelligible Cosmos or Logos 
can create and destroy and transmute all forms at will, but that man as the 
microcosm has potential in him this great magic power. 


67 Cf. C. H., i. 6; the Union of the Logos and Mind - or First-Born Son and Father - is Life; they are united in TEon. 
68 Quod Deus Im., § 6; M. i. 277; P. 298 (Ri. ii. 72, 73). 


- 124 - 



“BECOME ALL THINGS” 


The daring instruction given to Hermes in §§ 19 and 20 is distinctly a discipline 
of the Egyptian Wisdom; for though it is here set forth plainly and without 
circumlocution, as a straightforward intimate instruction, stripped of all mysterious 
hints or hesitating subterfuges 69 , it is clearly in the same circle of ideas of which 
popular Egyptian theurgy had some inkling. But whereas the philosopher-mystic 
was bidden to do this for himself of his own volition and achievement, the 
theurgist had to beg some god to do it for him. 

Thus in the same Prayer, to which we have already referred, we read (§§ 2, 3): 

“O holy Thoth, the true sight of whose face none of the gods endures! Make me to 
he in every creature s name [or ‘true form’], - wolf dog, or lion, fire, tree, or vulture, 
wall, or ivater, or what thou wiU’st, for thou art able so to do. ” 

So also in P. S. A.., vii., we have the same idea, for certainly the phrasing of the 
sentences suggests something beyond the ordinary powers of the mind or 
imagination. 

“He mingles with the elements by reason of the swiftness of his mind. He plunges 
into the sea’s depths by means of its profundity. He puts his values on all things. 

‘Heaven does not seem too high for him; for it is measured by the wisdom of his 
mind as though it were quite near. 

“No darkness of the air obstructs the penetration of his mind. No density of earth 
impedes his work. No depth of water blunts his sight. 

“Though still the same, yet is he all, and evey where is he the same. ” 

It is indeed a marvellous “yoga” system that is sketched for us in our treatise. 
There is no question here of abstraction or negation, but a courageous 
identification or At-one-ment of oneself with all that lives and breathes. This is the 
Path of the Gnosis, the Way to Know God. 

In other words, man is to copy his prototype, the Mind, and just as the Mind or 
Man, in the “Poemandres” treatise, “had a mind to break right through the 
Boundary of the spheres” (§ 13), so is our philosopher bidden to “soar up to the 
Last Body of them all” (§ 19), that Last Body being the One Element of Cosmos 
itself. 

“And shouldst thou will to break through this as well, and contemplate what is 
beyond - if there be aught beyond the Cosmos; it is permitted thee. ” 

That the hard and fast distinctions which modern commentators would draw 
between words, in considering these mystical treatises, would have been laughed at 
by the writers of them, is amply manifested when the writer with enthusiastic 
fervour bursts forth: 

“Then in this way know God, as having in Himself as thoughts the whole Cosmos 
itself. 

“If then, thou dost not make thyself like unto God 70 , thou canst not know Him 
7 . Tor like is knowable to like [alone]. Make, then, thyself to grow to the same 


69 Or, as the writer of the Pistis Sophia would say, ev 7iaggr]aia, “face to face without a parable.” 

70 Sc. as Cosmos. 


- 125 - 



stature as the Greatness which transcends all measure; leap forth from every body; 
transcend all time; become Eternity; and thus shalt thou know God. ” 

Every body or space must be transcended, even the Body of Cosmos itself; for 
the man must grow into the “stature of the Greatness that transcends all measure,” 
that is, the intelligible superspatial Pleroma, the /Ron as the Logos and Paradigm of 
Cosmos. And every time and all Time must also be transcended; for the man must 
become Eternity - that is, the /Eon as the Paradigm of Time. 

THE GOOD’S OWN PATH 

In no scripture that I know is this Path more admirably set forth - the Good’s 
own Path. All things, all spaces, and all times have to be realized as being within 
oneself simultaneously, if this is realized or known, not only imagined, then a man 
becomes a true Knower of God, a Gnostic. 

Nor has ever a truer sentence been written than the wonderful words concerning 
this Path to the Supreme: 

“If thou but sett’st thy foot thereon, ’twill meet thee everywhere, ’twill 
everywhere be seen, both where and when thou dost expect it not - waking, 
sleeping, sailing, journeying, by night, by day, speaking, and saying naught. For 
there is naught that is not image of the Good.” 

CONCERNING INDIA 

In conclusion, I would only point out that if for the hopeless reading in the first 
sentence of § 19 we were to take Patrizzi’s emendation, which has been adopted by 
Parthey, we should have the interesting sentence: 

“And, thus, think from thyself and bid thy soul go unto India. ” 

If this should be the original reading, it is remarkable that India should have 
been selected of all places. We know, however, from a study of what is known of 
the life of Apollonius of Tyana, that this “Gnostic” philosopher made an enormous 
propaganda of Indian ideas among the philosophic and mystic communities and 
schools of the first century. Apollonius must have known something, perhaps a 
great deal, concerning the siddhis acquired byjy ^-practices. At any rate, we find his 
biographer Philostratus making him write the following letter to his Eastern hosts 
on Inis return from India: 

“I came to you by land and ye have given me the sea; nay, rather, by sharing with 
me your wisdom ye have given me power to travel through heaven. These things will I 
bring back to the mind of the Greeks, and I will hold converse with you as though ye 
were present, if it be that I have not drunk of the Cup of Tantalus in vain. ” 72 

That an intensely great interest was taken in Indian ideas at Alexandria is shown 
by the fact that we find Plotinus himself in 242 starting off with the expedition of 
Gordian to the East in the hope of coming in contact with the Indian Wisdom. 


71 Sc. as Father of this Only Son. 

72 Philos., Vit. Ap., iii. 51. Cf. my Apollonius of Tyana, the Philosopher Reformer of the First Century A.D. (London, 1901), p. 




But all these considerations, though interesting in themselves, do not 
immediately concern us, unless we are subjectively persuaded that the emendation 
of Patrizzi is firmly established. Should, however, this reading in any way be 
confirmed by objective evidence, we should have to reconsider the question of date 
by the light of it, though, I fear, with little chance of any definite result. For though 
the propaganda of Indian ideas by Apollonius could not have begun prior to the 
middle of the first century, we have in this fact no very sure criterion, for “India” 
must have been in the air, and strongly in the air, even prior to Apollonius’ visit to 
India, or why should he have been induced to make so long and dangerous a 
journey? Indeed, “India” had been in the air ever since the expedition of Alexander 
- that is, from the beginning of the Alexandrian period - the second quarter of the 
fourth century B.C. onwards. 


- 127 - 



+- - » * 

CORPUS HERMETICUM XII. (XIII.) 

ABOUT THE COMMON MIND 

OF HERMES TO TAT 

(Text: P. 99-113; Pat. 23b-25b.) 

1. Hermes. 



HE Mind, O Tat, is of God’s very essence - (if 
such a thing as essence of God 7 ’ there be) - and 
what that is, it and it only knows precisely. 


The Mind, then, is not separated off from God’s 
essentiality, but is united unto it, as light to sun. 


This Mind in men is God, and for this cause some of 
mankind are gods, and their humanity is nigh unto 
divinity. 


For the Good Daimon said: “Gods are immortal men, 
and men are mortal gods.” 

2. But in irrational lives Mind is their nature. For where is 
Soul, there too is Mind; just as where Fife, there is there 
also Soul. 


But in irrational lives their soul is life devoid of mind 74 ; for 
Mind is the in-worker of the souls of men for good; - He 
works on them for their own good. 

In lives irrational He doth co-operate with each one’s 
nature; but in the souls of men He counteracteth them. 

For every soul, when it becomes embodied, is instantly 
depraved by pleasure and by pain. 

For in a compound body, just like juices, pain and 
pleasure seethe, and into them the soul, on entering in, is 
plunged 7 ’. 

3. O’er whatsoever souls the Mind doth, then, preside, to 
these it showeth its own light, by acting counter to their 
prepossessions, just as a good physician doth upon the 


73 That is, if we can use such a term with respect to God. 

74 That is, of the mind manifested in man as distinguished from the general Mind. 

75 (3oc7ra£eTai. 


- 128 - 



body prepossessed by sickness, pain inflict, burning or 
lancing it for sake of health. 

In just the selfsame way the Mind inflicteth pain upon the 
soul, to rescue it from pleasure, whence comes its every ill. 

The great ill of the soul is godlessness 76 ; then followeth 
fancy 77 for all evil things and nothing good. 

So, then, Mind counteracting it doth work good on the 
soul, as the physician health upon the body. 

4. But whatsoever human souls have not the Mind as 
pilot, they share in the same fate as souls of lives 
irrational. 

For [Mind] becomes co-worker with them, giving full play 
to the desires towards which [such souls] are borne, - 
[desires] that from the rush of lust strain after the 
irrational; [so that such human souls,] just like irrational 
animals, cease not irrationally to rage and lust, nor ever are 
they satiate of ills. 

For passions and irrational desires are ills exceeding great; 
and over these God hath set up the Mind to play the part 
of judge and executioner. 

5. Tat. In that case, father mine, the teaching {logos) as to 
Fate 78 , which previously thou didst explain to me, risks to 
be over- set. 

For that if it be absolutely fated for a man to fornicate, or 
commit sacrilege, or do some other evil deed, why is he 
punished, - when he hath done the deed from Fate’s 
necessity? 

Tier. All works, my son, are Fate’s; and without Fate 
naught of things corporal - or good, or ill - can come to 
pass. 


76 otOeor/]?. Cf C. H., x. (xi.) 8, 9: “And the soul’s vice is ignorance”; and § 20: “What greater chastisement of any 
human soul, can there be, son, than lack of piety?” The only way of salvation from the bonds of Fate is thus “piety” 
or “godliness.” See R. 102, 1, for references. 

77 8o?a. 

78 Heimarmene. 


- 129 - 



But it is fated too, that he who doeth ill, shall suffer. And 
for this cause he doth it - that he may suffer what he 
suffereth, because he did it. 

6. But for the moment, [Tat,] let be the teaching {logos) as 
to vice and Fate, for we have spoken of these things in 
other [of our sermons]; but now our teaching {logos) is 
about the Mind: - what Mind can do, and how it is [so] 
different, - in men being such and such, and in irrational 
lives [so] changed; and [then] again that in irrational lives 
it is not of a beneficial nature, while that in men it 
quencheth out the wrathful and the lustful elements. 

Of men, again, we must class some as led by reason, and 
others as unreasoning. 

7. But all men are subject to Fate, and genesis and change, 
for these 79 are the beginning and the end of Fate. 

And though all men do suffer fated things, those led by 
reason (those whom we said the Mind doth guide) do not 
endure like suffering with the rest; but, since they’ve freed 
themselves from viciousness, not being bad, they do not 
suffer bad. 

Tat. How meanest thou again, my father? Is not the 
fornicator bad; the murderer bad; and [so with] all the 
rest? 

Her. [I meant not that;] but that the Mind-led man, my 
son, though not a fornicator, will suffer just as though he 
had committed fornication, and though he be no 
murderer, as though he had committed murder. 

The quality of change he can no more escape than that of 
genesis. 

But it is possible for one who hath the Mind, to free 
himself from vice. 

8. Wherefore I’ve ever heard, my son, Good Daimon also 
say - (and had He set it down in written words, He would 
have greatly helped the race of men; for He alone, my son, 
doth truly, as the First-born God, gazing upon all things, 


79 Sc. genesis and change. 


- 130 - 



give voice to words (logoi) divine) - yea, once I heard Him 
say: 

“All things are one, and most of all the bodies which the 
mind alone perceives. Our life is owing to [God’s] Energy 
and Power and hEon. His Mind is Good, so is His Soul as 
well. And this being so, intelligible things know naught of 
separation. So, then, Mind, being Ruler of all things, and 
being Soul of God, can do whate’er it wills.” 

9. So do thou understand, and carry back this word {logos) 
unto the question thou didst ask before, - I mean about 
Mind’s Fate. 

For if thou dost with accuracy, son, eliminate [all] captious 
arguments {logoi), thou wilt discover that of very truth the 
Mind, the Soul of God, doth rule o’er all - o’er Fate, and 
Law, and all things else; and nothing is impossible to it, - 
neither o’er Fate to set a human soul 80 , nor under Fate to 
set [a soul] neglectful of what comes to pass. Let this so 
far suffice from the Good Daimon’s most good [words] 81 . 

Tat. Yea, [words] divinely spoken, father mine, truly and 
helpfully. But further still explain me this. 

10. Thou said’st that Mind in lives irrational worked in 
them as [their] nature, co-working with their impulses. 

But impulses of lives irrational, as I do think, are passions. 

Now if the Mind co-worketh with [these] impulses, and if 
the impulses of [lives] irrational be passions, then is Mind 
also passion, taking its colour from the passions. 

Her. Well put, my son! Thou questionest right nobly, and 
it is just that I as well should answer [nobly]. 

11. All things incorporal when in a body are subject unto 
passion, and in the proper sense they are [themselves] all 
passions. 

For every thing that moves [another] is incorporal; while 
every thing that’s moved is body. 


80 Cf. Lact, D. L, ii. 15. 

81 The critical text of this paragraph is given R. 78. 


- 131 - 



Incorporals are further moved by Mind, and movement’s 
passion. 

Both, then, are subject unto passion - both mover and the 
moved, the former being ruler and the latter ruled. 

But when a man hath freed himself from body, then is he 
also freed from passion. 

But, more precisely, son, naught is impassible, but all are 
passible. 

Yet passion differeth from passibility; for that the one is 
active, while the other’s passive. 

Incorporals 82 moreover act upon themselves, for either 
they are motionless 8 ’ or they are moved; but whichsoe’er 
it be, it’s passion. 

But bodies are invariably acted on, and therefore are they 
passible. 

Do not, then, let terms trouble thee; action and passion 
are both the selfsame thing. To use the fairer sounding 
term, however, does no harm. 

12. Tat. Most clearly hast thou, father mine, set forth the 
teaching {logos). 

Her. Consider this as well, my son; that these two things 
God hath bestowed on man beyond all mortal lives - both 
mind and speech (logos) equal to immortality. He hath the 
mind for knowing God and uttered speech (logos) for 
eulogy of Him 84 . 

And if one useth these for what he ought, he’ll differ not a 
whit from the immortals 8 ’. Nay, rather, on departing from 
the body, he will be guided by the twain unto the Choir of 
Gods and Blessed Ones. 

13. Tat. Why, father mine! - do not the other lives make 
use of speech (logos)? 


82 Reading aowpaxa for awpaxa. 

83 The words I have translated by “act,” “active” and “action,” may be more literally rendered by “energize,” 
“energic” and “energy.” The “motionless” has “energy” because it is the cause of motion to that which it moves. 

84 Following the emendation of R. 

85 The critical text of the above paragraphs is given R. 156, n. 6. 


- 132 - 



Her. Nay, son; but use of voice; speech is far different 
from voice. For speech is general among all men, while 
voice doth differ in each class of living thing. 

Tat. But with men also, father mine, according to each 
race, speech differs. 

Her. Yea, son, but man is one; so also speech is one and is 
interpreted, and it is found the same in Egypt, and in 
Persia, and in Greece. 

Thou seemest, son, to be in ignorance of Reason’s 
(Logos) 86 worth and greatness. For that the Blessed God, 
Good Daimon, hath declared: 

“Soul is in Body, Mind in Soul; but Reason (Logos) is in 
Mind, and Mind in God; and God is Father of [all] these.” 

14. The Reason, then, is the Mind’s image, and Mind 
God’s [image]; while Body is [the image] of the Form; and 
Form [the image] of the Soul. 

The subtlest part of Matter is, then, Air; of Air, Soul; of 
Soul, Mind; and of Mind, God 87 . 

And God surroundeth all and permeateth all 88 ; while Mind 
surroundeth Soul, Soul Air, Air Matter. 

Necessity 89 and Providence and Nature are instruments of 
Cosmos and of Matter’s ordering; while of intelligible 
things each is Essence, and Sameness is their Essence. 

But of the Bodies 911 of the Cosmos each is many; for 
through possessing Sameness, \these\ composed Bodies, 
though they do change from one into another of 
themselves, do natheless 91 ever keep the incorruption of 
their Sameness. 

15. Whereas in all the rest of composed bodies, of each 
there is a certain number; for without number structure 
cannot be, or composition, or decomposition. 


86 It is impossible to bring out the word-play of the original in English; and so the double meaning is lost. 

87 This sentence is tagged on to the end of C. H., v. (vi.) by some scribe. 

88 Cf. § 20 below. 

89 Reading avayxT] for avayxri; see § 21 below. 

90 Sc. the elements. 

91 [Ed. (archaic) Nevertheless] 


- 133 - 



Now it is units that give birth to number and increase it, 
and, being decomposed, are taken back again into 
themselves. 

Matter is one; and this whole Cosmos - the mighty God 
and image of the mightier One, both with Him unified, 
and the conserver of the Will and Order of the Father - is 
filled full of Life 92 . 

Naught is there in it throughout the whole of FEon, the 
Father’s [everlasting] Re-establishment 9 ’, - nor of the 
whole, nor of its parts, - which doth not live. 

For not a single thing that’s dead, hath been, or is, or shall 
be in [this] Cosmos. 

For that the Father willed it should have Life as long as it 
should be. Wherefore it needs must be a God. 

16. How, then, O son, could there be in the God, the 
image of the Father 94 , in the plenitude 9 ’ of Life - dead 
things 96 ? 

For that death is corruption, and corruption is 
destruction. 

How then could any part of that which knoweth no 
corruption be corrupted, or any whit of him the God 
destroyed? 

Tat. Do they not, then, my father, die - the lives in it, that 
are its parts? 

Tier. Hush, son! - led into error by the term in use for 
what takes place. 

They do not die, my son, but are dissolved as compound 
bodies. 

Now dissolution is not death, but dissolution of a 
compound; it is dissolved not so that it may be destroyed, 
but that it may become renewed. 


92 Lit. a Pleroma of Life. 

93 OlTioxaxaaxaaig. 

94 Reading Ttocxgd? for tiavxo?. 

95 Pleroma. 

96 A critical text of the last five paragraphs is given R. 25, n. 1. 


- 134 - 



For what is the activity of life? Is it not motion? What 
then in Cosmos is there that hath no motion? Naught is 
there, son! 

17. Tat. Doth not Earth even, father, seem to thee to have 
no motion? 

Her. Nay, son; but rather that she is the only thing which, 
though in very rapid motion, is also stable. 

For how would it not be a thing to laugh at, that the 
Nurse of all should have no motion, when she engenders 
and brings forth all things? 

For ’tis impossible that without motion one who doth 
engender, should do so. 

That thou shouldst ask if the fourth part 9 is not inert, is 
most ridiculous; for that the body which doth have no 
motion, gives sign of nothing but inertia. 

18. Know, therefore, generally, my son, that all that is in 
Cosmos is being moved for decrease or for increase. 

Now that which is kept moving, also lives; but there is no 
necessity that that which lives, should be all same. 

For being simultaneous, the Cosmos, as a whole, is not 
subject to change, my son, but all its parts are subject unto 
it; yet naught [of it] is subject to corruption, or destroyed. 

It is the terms employed that confuse men. For ’tis not 
genesis that constituteth life, but ’tis sensation; it is not 
change that constituteth death, but ’tis forgetfulness. 

Since, then, these things are so, they are immortal all, - 
Matter, [and] Life, [and] Spirit, Mind [and] Soul, of which 
whatever liveth, is composed. 

19. Whatever then doth live, oweth its immortality unto 
the Mind, and most of all doth man, he who is both 
recipient of God, and co-essential with Him. 

For with this life alone doth God consort; by visions in 
the night, by tokens in the day, and by all things doth He 


97 Sc. element. 


- 135 - 



foretell the future unto him, - by birds, by inward parts, by 
wind, by tree. 

Wherefore doth man lay claim to know things past, things 
present and to come. 

20. Observe this, too, my son; that each one of the other 
lives inhabiteth one portion of the Cosmos, - aquatic 
creatures water, terrene earth, and aery creatures air; while 
man doth use all these, - earth, water, air, [and] fire; he 
seeth heaven, too, and doth contact it with [his] sense. 

But God surroundeth all, and permeateth all 98 , for He is 
energy and power; and it is nothing difficult, my son, to 
conceive God. 

21. But if thou wouldst Him also contemplate , behold the 
ordering of the Cosmos, and [see] the orderly behaviour 
of its ordering; behold thou the Necessity of things made 
manifest, and [see] the Providence of things become and 
things becoming; behold how Matter is all-full of Life; 
[behold] this so great God in movement, with all the good 
and noble [ones] - gods, daimones and men! 

Tat. But these are purely energies, O father mine! 

Her. If, then, they’re purely energies, my son, - by whom, 
then, are they energized except by God? 

Or art thou ignorant, that just as Heaven, Earth, Water, 
Air, are parts of Cosmos, in just the selfsame way God’s 
parts are Life and Immortality, [and] Energy, and Spirit, 
and Necessity, and Providence, and Nature, Soul, and 
Mind, and the Duration 99 of all these that is called Good? 

And there is naught of things that have become, or are 
becoming, in which God is not. 

22. Tat. Is He in Matter, father, then? 

Her. Matter, my son, is separate from God, in order that 
thou may’st attribute unto it the quality of space. But what 
thing else than mass 1 "" think’st thou it is, if it’s not 


98 Cf. § 14 above. 

99 Sc. iEon. 

ion Probably in the sense of “quantity.” 


- 136 - 



energized? Whereas if it be energized, by whom is it made 
so? For energies, we said, are parts of God. 

By whom are, then, all lives enlivened? By whom are 
things immortal made immortal? By whom changed 
things made changeable? 

And whether thou dost speak of Matter, or of Body, or of 
Essence, know that these too are energies of God; and 
that materiality is Matter’s energy, that corporality is 
Bodies’ energy, and that essentiality doth constitute the 
energy of Essence; and this is God - the All. 

23. And in the All is naught that is not God. Wherefore 
nor size, nor space, nor quality, nor form, nor time, 
surroundeth God; for He is All, and All surroundeth all, 
and permeateth all. 

Unto this Reason (Logos), son, thy adoration and thy 
worship pay. There is one way alone to worship God; [it 
is] not to be bad 1 " 1 . 


a 





101 Lactantius, D. /., vi. 25, translates the last two sentences into Latin, with the strange remark that Hermes so spake 
in treating “About justice.” See the following Commentary on § 6, and Ex. xi. 


- 137 - 



COMMENTARY 


THE SAYINGS OF THE GOOD DAIMON 

This Sermon has as its subject the Common or General Mind - Great Mind, 
Good Mind, Good Daimon. For Mind, as we are told (§ 2), is the Benefactor of 
men (sUspysTriq avOqoiTioov); He is the Good Shepherd, the Good Husbandman, the 
Good Physician, as He is called in different tractates. 

From a critical standpoint, the point of greatest interest is that our Hermes in no 
less than three places (§§ 1, 8, 13) quotes certain Sayings of the Good Daimon. 

Now the first of these quotations (§ 1) - “Gods are immortal men, and men are 
mortal Gods” - is one of the most cited Sayings of Heracleitus 102 . Hermes, 
however, does not mean to say that Heracleitus was Agothodaimon, but that 
Heracleitus was the mouthpiece of the Good Mind when he uttered this “word” 
{logos). 

Nor was this the opinion of Hermes only; it was the belief apparendy of 
Heracleitus himself when he declared: 

“Not because you hear me say so, but because you hear the Reason (Logos) so 
declare, is it wise to confess that All are One. ” 103 

At any rate the term Logos, as used by Heracleitus, in connection with such a 
declaration, is taken by Hippolytus 104 to mean the All-pervading Reason, and not 
the normal reason of man. 

What, then, is our surprise to find the second of Hermes’ quotations of a Saying 
of the Good Daimon qualified by the words (§ 8): “And had He set it down in 
written words” or “in writing,” when that quotation begins with the words: “All are 
One” 105 - the root-formula of Heracleitus. 

Such Sayings of Heracleitus must have been the common property of all the 
philosophers of the time and of their pupils. But the quotation of Hermes does not 
end with the formula of Heracleitus; it continues, how far exactly it is difficult to 
determine. Reitzenstein (p. 127) would apparently make it end with the word 
“fEon,” but I am inclined to think it goes to the end of § 8. In either case it 
includes the term “/Ron.” 

If, now, we turn to the third quotation from the Sayings of the Good Daimon (§ 
13), we are at once struck with its remarkable resemblance to the form of teaching 
in C. H., xi. (xii.) 4. Though there is no precise verbal agreement, there is a striking 
identity of style of formula. 

In our treatise, however, the Saying is used in authoritative illustration of the 
meaning of the Reason (Logos), whereas in the “Mind to Hermes,” - that is, in the 
Sermon of the Good Daimon Himself to Hermes - Reason is omitted, Mind and 
Reason being there transcended by /Ron and Mind. 


102 Diels, 62; Bywater, 67; Fairbanks, 67 (p. 40), which see for references to ancient authors who quote it. 

103 Diels, 50; Bywater, 1; Fairbanks, 1 (p. 24). 

104 Philos., ix. 9. 

105 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 25, and xvi. (“Definitions of Asclepius”) 3; for references to the Magical and Alchemical 
literature, see R. 39, 1; 106, 5; 127, 3. 


- 138 - 



Moreover, the whole style of what follows this quotation in our treatise is exactly 
the same as the style of instruction in C. H., xi. (xii.) - short categorical formulas; 
and, further, the previous quotation (§ 8) contains the key-word TEon, which 
characterizes the teaching of the “Mind to Hermes.” 

I therefore conclude that our Hermes is using a more intimate instruction, 
known only to the Hermes-grade, and not published for the Tat-degree; and that 
this is the meaning of his saying that it has not been written down. He means 
simply that it has not yet been allowed to be published for those in the Tat-stage. 

There were, then, other treatises now lost of the same type as that of the “Mind 
to Hermes”; in them there were quotations from the Sayings of Heracleitus; the 
“Obscure Philosopher” being regarded as one who had come into direct contact 
with the Logos or Mind, and as one, therefore, who spoke with the authority of 
direct revelation. 


HERMES AND BASILIDES 

The next point of critical interest is the sentence in § 7: 

“I meant not that, hut that the Mind-led man, my son, though not a fornicator, 
will suffer just as though he had committed fornication, and though he he no murderer, 
as though he had committed murder. ” 

If we now turn to the quotation which Clement of Alexandria 106 gives us from 
Book XXIII. of the Exegetica, of Basilides, we read: 

“F or just as the hahe, who, although it hath done no wrong previously, or actively 
committed any sin, yet hath the capacity of sin in it, - whenever it is subjected to 
suffering is advantaged and reaps many benefits, which otherwise are difficult to gain ; 
in just the selfsame way is it, that although a pefect man may not have sinned in act, 
and yet doth suffer pains, he suffereth them in just the selfsame fashion as a babe; 
having within himself the tendency to sin, but refusing to embrace the opportunity to 
sin, he doth not sin. So that even for such a man as this we ought not to suppose the 
incapacity for sin. 

“tor just as it is the will to commit fornication that constitutes the fornicator, even 
though he does not find the opportunity of actually committing fornication, and the will 
to commit murder that constitutes the murderer, although he may not be actually able 
to effect his purpose; so also in the case of the ‘ sinless ’ man I mean, if I see him 
suffering even if he has actually done no sin, I shall say he is evil by his will to sin. 

For I will say anything rather than that Providence is evil. ” 107 

Providence, as in our treatise, is here the instrument of the Good (§ 14), of the 
Will of God; it is the will of man that is the source of evil, as we learn from C. H., 
iv. (v.) 8: “For ’tis not God, ’tis we who are the cause of evil things, preferring them 
to good.” 

In our treatise, then, the very same problem is treated as in the Exegetica of 
Basilides. Hermes speaks of the “Mind-led man,” the “man who has the Logos in 


106 Strom., IV. xii., § 82 (P. 600; S. 217): Dindorf., ii. 363. 

107 See F. F. F, 274, 275. 


- 139 - 



him”; Basilides speaks of die “perfect man.” So also in C. H., iv. (v.) 4, die “perfect 
man” is he who has “received the Mind.” 

The ideas of Hermes and of Basilides are practically identical; the words of both 
are strikingly similar when they cite fornication and murder as typical sins, and 
these and no others. 

Compare again with this idea of the babe in Basilides the words of Hermes in C. 
H., x. (xi.) 15: 

“Behold an infant’s soul, my son, that is not yet cut off, because its body is still 
small and not as yet come unto its full bulk. ... A tiling of beauty 7 altogether is such 
a soul to see, not yet befouled with body’s passions, still all but hanging from the 
Cosmic Soul.” 

And with this compare what Hippolytus 108 tells us of Valentinus: 

‘Valentinus says that he once saw a babe that had only just been bom, and that 
he proceeded to question it to find out who it was. And the babe replied and said it 
was the Logos. ” 

And also the Psalm of Valentinus quoted by the same heresiologist 1 " 9 : 

All things dependingfirom Spirit I see; 

All things supported by Spirit I view; 

Flesh from Soul depending; 

Soul by Air supported; 

Air from Wither hanging; 

Fruits borne of the Deep; 

Babe borne of the Womb. 

Here, then, as in other instances, we have intimate points of contact between the 
Hermetic and Christian Gnosis. Is there, however, any question of direct 
plagiarism? I think not; but that the Christian doctors and the Hermetic 
philosophers were both in contact with the same body of inner teaching. 

4. With the action of the Mind on the soul in incarnation (§ 4) compare C. H., x. 
(xi.), 18, 19, where the office of the Mind in respect to the soul out of incarnation is 
graphically described. 


THE SERMONS ON FATE 

6. In § 6 Hermes tells us that he has already spoken about Fate in others of his 
Sermons; while in §§ 14 and 21 he three times refers to Necessity and Providence. 

In this connection it is to be noticed that Lactantius (D. I., vi. 25), in quoting the 
last two sentences of our treatise, says that he takes them from a Sermon by 
Hermes “On Justice.” 

Now, Stobasus has preserved for us an Extract (xi.) from a Sermon dealing with 
Justice, Providence, Necessity and Fate; also an Extract (x.) from a Sermon of 
Hermes to Tat dealing with Fate, and ending with the words: “Such is the Sermon 
on the rule of Providence, Necessity and Fate.” We have also an Extract (xiii.) “Of 


108 Philos., vi. 42 (D. and S., 302); F. F. F., p. 306. 

109 Philos., vi. 37 (D. and S., 290); see emended text in Hilgenfeld (A.), Die Ket^ergeschichte des Urchristenthums (Leipzig, 
1884), p. 304; F. F. F., p. 307. 


- 140 - 



Hermes from the Books to Ammon,” entitled “Of the General Economy,” which 
deals with Providence, Necessity and Fate. 

There were, then, according to Hermes, already existing not one but several 
Sermons on Fate, and, as we learn from Stobasus, not only in the Tat-literature but 
also in the Ammon-literature. It seems, then, probable that in the collection used 
by Lactantius the Tat-Sermons on Fate immediately preceded our treatise, and that 
one of these sermons (the one immediately preceding our treatise, presumably) was 
entitled “On Justice,” thus confirming the title I have prefixed to the Stobasus 
Extract xi. 

MATERIALITY AND CORPORALITY ARE ENERGIES OF GOD 

22. Finally, in § 22 it has to be noticed that with the express teaching that Matter 
and Body are so far from being evil that they are Energies of God - His materiality 
and corporality - the charge of dualism against our philosophers must for ever be 
abandoned. Their doctrine was that of pan-monism; and, therefore, wherever we 
find signs of dualism, or even distinct statements of an indubitably dualistic nature, 
we must understand that this was a formal convenience for the better insistence 
upon die need of strenuous exertion to solve the mystery of the opposites, rather 
than an essential doctrine of the Gnosis. 


- 141 - 



+- m ♦ - fc - 

CORPUS HERMETICUM XIII. (XIV.) 

THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 

CONCERNING REBIRTH AND THE PROMISE OF SILENCE 

OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES UNTO TAT HIS SON 

(Text: R. 339-348; P. 114-128; Pat . 15b-17b.) 

1. Tat. 



N ; the General Sermons 1 2 , father, thou didst 
speak in riddles most unclear, conversing on 
Divinity; and when thou saidst no man could 
saved before Rebirth’, thy meaning thou didst 


Further, when I became thy Suppliant, in Wending up the 
Mount 4 5 , after thou hadst conversed with me, and when I 
longed to learn the Sermon (Logos) on Rebirth (for this 
beyond all other things is just the thing I know not), thou 
saidst, that thou wouldst give it me - “when thou shalt 
have become a stranger to the world.” 3 

Wherefore I got me ready and made the thought in me a 
stranger 6 to the world-illusion. 

And now do thou fill up the things that fall short 7 in me 
with what thou saidst would give me the tradition 8 of 
Rebirth, setting it forth in speech or in the secret way. 

I know not, O Thrice-greatest one, from out what matter 
and what womb Man comes to birth, or of what seed 9 . 


1 [Ed. Mead added the word ’’Now” to the beginning of the sentence, which is suggesting a direct continuation of 
the previous Sermon] 

2 ev tot? Ysvixovg. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 1 and 7. 

3 ntxKiyy svsoia. 

4 Reading std if]? ton ogou? pexa(3aaew? with P., and not Hocxa-(3aaew? with R. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 15; jamb., D. M., viii. 
6 . 

5 KOOfJlOU. 

6 Reading aTtrjXXoxgitoaa with the majority of the editors, and not the 0 lTcr] 8 giaa of R. 

7 xa Uaxegf] ftaxa avoc7tXf](Xoaov. 

8 7 taga 8 ouvai, the word used for the giving of this lesson or inner instmction is the technical term for the “handing 
on” of a doctrine or being initiated into it. 

9 R.’s reading would make this refer to Hermes: “I know not from what womb thou com’st to birth.” But the whole 
instruction seems to favour the usually accepted reading. 


- 142 - 



2. Hermes. Wisdom that understands 1 " in silence 11 [such is 
the matter and the womb from out which Man is born], 
and the True Good the seed. 

Tat. Who is the sower, father? For I am altogether at a 
loss. 

Her. It is the Will of God, my son. 

Tat. And of what kind is he that is begotten, father? For I 
have no share of that essence in me, which doth transcend 
the senses 12 . The one that is begot will be another one 
from God, God’s Son? 

Her. All in all, out of all powers composed. 

Tat. Thou tellest me a riddle, father, and dost not speak as 
father unto son. 

Her. This Race 1 ’, my son, is never taught; but when He 
willeth it, its memory is restored by God. 

3. Tat. Thou sayest things impossible, O father, things that 
are forced. Hence answers would I have direct unto these 
things. Am I a son strange to my father’s race? 

Keep it not, father, back from me. I am a true-born son; 
explain to me the manner of Rebirth. 

Her. What may I say, my son? I can but tell thee this. 
Whene’er I see within myself the Simple Vision 14 brought 
to birth out of God’s mercy 1 ’, I have passed through 
myself into a Body that can never die. And now I am not 
what I was before; but I am born in Mind. 

The way to do this is not taught, and it cannot be seen by 
the compounded 16 element by means of which thou seest. 

Yea, I have had my former composed form dismembered 
for me. I am no longer touched, yet have I touch; I have 
dimension too; and [yet] am I a stranger to them now. 


10 aotpia voega. 

11 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 5. 

12 ifj<; ev epioi ouaiai; if]? vorjrrji;. 

13 Cf. Ex. i. 3. 

14 OUikaaTOV, that is to say, not made up, non-fictitious, not compounded; that is, simple - the opposite of 
compounded. 

15 Cf. below, § 7: the man “who hath been taken pity on by God”; and also §10. 

16 TtXoCCTTOV. 


- 143 - 



Thou seest me with eyes, my son; but what I am thou dost 
not understand [even] with fullest strain of body and of 
sight. 

4. Tat. Into fierce frenzy and mind-fury hast thou plunged 
me, father, for now no longer do I see myself. 

Her. I would, my son, that thou hadst e’en passed right 
through thyself, as they who dream in sleep yet sleepless. 

Tat. Tell me this too! Who is the author 17 of Rebirth? 

Her. The Son of God, the One Man, by God’s Will. 

5. Tat. Now hast thou brought me, father, unto pure 
stupefaction. 

Arrested from the senses which I had before, . . 18 . . ; for 
[now] I see thy Greatness identical with thy distinctive 
form. 

Her. Even in this thou art untrue 19 ; the mortal form doth 
change with every day. ’Tis turned by time to growth and 
waning, as being an untrue thing 211 . 

6. Tat. What then is true, Thrice-greatest One? 

Her. That which is never troubled, son, which cannot be 
defined; that which no colour hath, nor any figure, which 
is not turned, which hath no garment, which giveth light; 
that which is comprehensible unto itself [alone], which 
doth not suffer change; that which no body can contain 21 . 

Tat. In very truth I lose my reason, father. Just when I 
thought to be made wise by thee, I find the senses of this 
mind of mine blocked up. 

Her. Thus is it, son: That which is upward borne like fire, 
yet is borne down like earth, that which is moist like 
water, yet blows like air 22 , how shalt thou this perceive 
with sense - the that which is not solid nor yet moist, 
which naught can bind or loose, of which in power and 


17 Ysvsaiougyo?- 

18 A lacuna unfortunately follows. 

19 t|is68r|. 

20 d>? t|isC8o?. 

21 Cf. P. S. A., xxxi . A 

22 Cf.C.H., i v. (v.) 1. 


- 144 - 



energy alone can man have any notion, - and even then it 
wants a man who can 2 " perceive the Way of Birth in 
God 24 ? 

7. Tat. I am incapable of this, O father, then? 

Her. Nay, God forbid, my son! Withdraw into thyself, and 
it will come; mil . ’ and it comes to pass; throw out of work 
the body’s senses, and thy Divinity shall come to birth; 
purge from thyself the brutish torments - things of matter. 

Tat. I have tormentors then in me, O father? 

Her. Ay, no few, my son; nay, fearful ones and manifold. 

Tat. I do not know them, father. 

Her. Torment the first is this Not-knowing 2 ", son; the 
second one is Grief; the third, Intemperance; the fourth, 
Concupiscence; the fifth, Unrighteousness; the sixth is 
Avarice; the seventh, Error 26 ; the eighth is Envy; the 
ninth, Guile 27 ; the tenth is Anger; eleventh, Rashness; the 
twelfth is Malice. 

These are in number twelve; but under them are many 
more, my son; and creeping through the prison of the 
body 28 they force the man that’s placed within 29 to suffer 
in his senses. But they depart (although not all at once) 
from him who hath been taken pity on by God’ 0 ; and this 
it is which constitutes the manner of Rebirth. And . . 31 . . 
the Reason (Logos). 

8. And now, my son, be still and solemn silence keep! 
Thus shall the mercy that flows on us from God not 
cease. 

Henceforth rejoice, O son, for by the Powers of God 
thou art being purified for the articulation of the Reason 
(Logos). 


23 Retaining the reading Seogevou 8s ton Suvagsvou. 

24 xf|v ev 0sa> ysvsaiv - f. § 10. 

25 ayvoia. 

26 CLTUXVr}. 

27 86 Xoq. 

28 Cf. C. H., xvi. 15. 

29 EvSiaOsxov. 

30 Cf. above, § 3: “brought to birth out of God’s mercy”; and also § 10. 

31 A lacuna in the text. 


- 145 - 



Gnosis of God hath come to us, and when this comes, my 
son, Not-knowing is cast out. 

Gnosis of Joy hath come to us, and on its coming, son, 
Sorrow will flee away to them who give it room. The 
Power that follows Joy do I invoke, thy Self-control. O 
Power most sweet! Let us most gladly bid it welcome, son! 
How with its coming doth it chase Intemperance away! 

9. Now fourth, on Continence I call, the Power against 
Desire. 

. . 32 . . This step, my son, is Righteousness’ firm seat. For 
without judgment 3 ’ see how she hath chased 
Unrighteousness away. We are made righteous, son, by 
the departure of Unrighteousness. 

Power sixth I call to us, - that against Avarice, Sharing- 
with-all 34 . 

And now that Avarice is gone, I call on Truth. And Error 
flees, and Truth is with us. 

See how [the measure of] the Good is full, my son, upon 
Truth’s coming. For Envy hath gone from us; and unto 
Truth is joined the Good as well, with Life and Light. 

And now no more doth any torment of the Darkness 
venture nigh, but vanquished [all] have fled with whirring 
wings. 

10. Thou knowest [now], my son, the manner of Rebirth. 
And when the Ten is come, my son, that driveth out the 
Twelve, the Birth in understanding” is complete, and by 
this Birth we are made into Gods. 

Who then doth by His mercy gain this Birth in God, 
abandoning the body’s senses, knows himself [to be of 


32 Something has here evidently fallen out in the text. 

33 ywgi? Kgiaswg. If, however, we must read x-uaew? with the majority of the editors, I cannot understand the various 
translations. Everard gives “without labour”; Parthey, “ nulla contention c”; Menard, "sans conibaf\ Chambers, “without 
contention.” I would, therefore, render it: “See how she hath chased out Unrighteousness without a home”; for it 
seems to me that in ycogi? xxiasw? we have the exact antithesis of shgaaga. Righteousness has here her firm seat or 
abode, and Unrighteousness is thus naturally without a home. 

34 xoivwviav. 

35 vosga ysvsai?, lit., intellectual birth. 


- 146 - 



Light and Life’ 6 ] and that he doth consist of these, and 
[thus] is filled with Bliss. 

11. Tat. By God made steadfast, father, no longer with the 
sight my eyes afford I look on things, but with the energy 
the Mind doth give me through the Powers’ 7 . 

In heaven am I, in earth, in water, air; I am in animals, in 
plants; I’m in the womb, before the womb, after the 
womb; I’m everywhere! 

But further tell me this: How are the torments of the 
Darkness, when they are twelve in number, driven out by 
the ten Powers? What is the way of it, Thrice-greatest 
one? 

12. Her. This dwelling-place’ 8 through which we have just 
passed, my son, is constituted from the circle of the types- 
of-life, this being composed of elements, twelve in 
number, but of one nature, an omniform ’ 9 idea. For man’s 
delusion there are disunions 4 " in them, son, while in their 
action they are one. Not only can we never part Rashness 
from Wrath; they cannot even be distinguished. 

According to right reason {logos), then, they 41 naturally 
withdraw once and for all, in as much as they are chased 
out by no less than ten powers, that is, the Ten. 

For, son, the Ten is that which giveth birth to souls. And 
Life and Light are unified there, where the One hath being 
from the Spirit. According then to reason {logos) the One 
contains the Ten, the Ten the One. 

13. Tat. Father, I see the All, I see myself in Mind. 

Her. This is, my son, Rebirth - no more to look on things 
from body’s view-point (a thing three ways in space 
extended), 42 . . A though this Sermon (Logos) on Rebirth, 


36 Completed from C. H., i. 22. 

37 xfj 8ia Sivapewv vo?]Tixfj evegyeia. 

38 oxrjvo?, - tent or tabernacle of the human soul. Cf. below, § 15. 

39 Cf. commentary on C. H., xi. (xii.) 16. 

40 Sia^uyai - the opposite of aui^uyiai. 

41 That is, the Twelve. 

42 As opposed to some other dimension, presumably. 

43 Some words are evidently missing. 


- 147 - 



on which I did not comment 44 ; - in order that we may not 
be calumniators 4 ' of the All unto the multitude, to whom 
indeed the God Himself doth will we should not. 

14. Tat. Tell me, O father: This Body which is made up of 
the Powers, is it at any time dissolved? 

Her. Hush, [son]! Speak not of things impossible, else wilt 
thou sin and thy Mind’s eye be quenched. 

The natural body which our sense perceives is far 
removed from this essential birth. 

The first must be dissolved, the last can never be; the first 
must die, the last death cannot touch. 

Dost thou not know thou hast been born a God, Son of 
the One, even as I myself? 

15. Tat. I would, O father, hear the Praise-giving with 
hymn which thou didst say thou heardest then when thou 
wert at the Eight [the Ogdoad] of Powers. 

Her. Just as the Shepherd did foretell [I should], my son, 
[when I came to] the Eight 46 . 

Well dost thou haste to “strike thy tent,” 47 for thou hast 
been made pure. 

The Shepherd, Mind of all masterhood 48 , hath not passed 
on to me more than hath been writ down, for full well did 
He know that I should of myself be able to learn all, and 
hear what I should wish, and see all things. 

He left to me the making of fair things 49 ; wherefore the 
Powers within me, e’en as they are in all' 0 , break into song. 

16. Tat. Father, I wish to hear; I long to know these 
things. 


44 See § 1. 

45 8ux(3okoi, compare § 22. The lacuna probably contained some reference to keeping silence. 

46 Cf.C.H., i. 26. 

47 Xuoai to oxf]vog. Cf. above, § 12. The meaning is generally to free oneself from the trammels of the body. Compare 
the Pythian Oracle concerning Plotinus: “But now since thou hast struck thy tent and left the tomb of thy daimonic 
soul” (vtiv 8’ Ots Sr| axf]vo? psv skuaao, arjpa 8’ Ekeitjia? (Jjuyfjy Saipovig). Porphyry, Plotini Vita, xxii.; f Ex. vii. 3; 

Ex. iii. 1 . 

48 Cf. C. H., i. 2. 

49 Sc. psalms and praise-giving. 

50 Sc. prophets. 


- 148 - 



Her. Be still, my son; hear the Praise-giving now that keeps 
[the soul] in tune. Hymn of Re-birth - a hymn I would not 
have thought fit so readily to tell, had’st thou not reached 
the end of all. 

Wherefore this is not taught, but is kept hid in silence. 

Thus then, my son, stand in a place uncovered to the sky, 
facing the southern wind 31 , about the sinking of the 
setting sun, and make thy worship; so in like manner too 
when he doth rise, with face to the east wind. 

Now, son, be still! 

THE SECRET HYMNODY 

17. Let every nature of the World receive the utterance of 
my hymn! 

Open thou Earth! Let every bolt of the Abyss be drawn 
for me. Stir not, ye Trees! 

I am about to hymn creation’s Lord, both All and One. 

Ye Heavens open, and ye Winds stay still; [and] let God’s 
deathless Sphere receive my word (logos)\ 

For I will sing the praise of Him who founded all; who 
fixed the Earth, and hung up Heaven, and gave command 
that Ocean should afford sweet water [to the Earth], to 
both those parts that are inhabited and those that are not, 
for the support and use of every man; who made the Fire 
to shine for gods and men for every act. 

Let us together all give praise to Him, sublime above the 
Heavens, of every nature Lord! 

’Tis He who is the Eye of Mind; may He accept the praise 
of these my Powers! 

18. Ye Powers that are within me, hymn the One and All; 
sing with my Will, Powers all that are within me! 

O blessed Gnosis, by thee illumined, hymning through 
thee the Light that mind alone can see 32 , I joy in Joy of 
Mind. 


51 Also used of the south-west quarter. The “south wind” is thought to have extended from SSE. to W. 

52 to vo^TOv tprog. 


- 149 - 



Sing with me praises all ye Powers! 

Sing praise, my Self-control; sing thou through me, my 
Righteousness, the praises of the Righteous; sing thou, my 
Sharing-all, the praises of the All; through me sing, Truth, 
Truth’s praises! 

Sing thou, O Good, the Good! O Life and Light, from us 
to you our praises flow! 

Father, I give Thee thanks, to Thee Thou Energy of all 
my Powers; I give Thee thanks, O God, Thou Power of 
all my Energies! 

19. Thy Reason (Logos) sings through me Thy praises. 
Take back through me the All into [Thy] Reason - [my] 
reasonable oblation 3 ’! 

Thus cry the Powers in me. They sing Thy praise, Thou 
All; they do Thy Will. 

From Thee Thy Will’ 4 ; to Thee the All. Receive from all 
their reasonable oblation. The All that is in us, O Life, 
preserve; O Light illumine it; O God in-spirit it”. 

It is Thy Mind that plays the Shepherd’ 6 to Thy Word’ 7 , O 
Thou Creator, Bestower of the Spirit [upon all] ’ 8 . 

20. [For] Thou art God; Thy Man’ 9 thus cries to Thee 
through Fire, through Air, through Earth, through Water, 
[and] through Spirit, through Thy creatures. 

’Tis from Thy /Lon I have found Praise-giving; and in Thy 
Will 60 , the object of my search, have I found rest. 

Fat. By thy good pleasure 61 have I seen this Praise-giving 
being sung , 62 O father; I have set it in my Cosmos too. 


53 Cf. below, 21. 

54 Cf. P. S. A., Comment, and R. 39, n. 1. 

55 The Spirit being Light and Life. 

56 Ttoipaivsi, acts as a shepherd or feeds; Poemandres is thus the Shepherd of men or the feeder of men, He who gives 
them the heavenly food. 

57 The Word or Reason or true Man in man. 

58 Ttveupatotpoge 8r|fuougY®- 

59 Cf. C.H., i. 32. 

60 (3ouM]. 

61 0sXt]fji.a. 

62 Cf., for instance, The Ascension of Isaiah, i. 6: “In the twentieth year of the reign of Hezekiah, Isaiah had seen the 
words of this prophecy.” - Charles’ Trans. (London, 1900), p. 5. 


- 150 - 



Her. Say in the Cosmos that thy mind alone can see, my 
son. 

Tat. Yea, father, in the Cosmos that the mind alone can 
see; for I have been made able by thy Hymn, and by thy 
Praise-giving my mind hath been illumined. But further I 
myself as well would from my natural mind send praise- 
giving to God. 

21. Her. But not unheedfully, my son. 

Tat. Ay. What I behold in mind, that do I say. 

To thee, thou Parent of my Bringing into Birth, as unto 
God I, Tat, send reasonable offerings 61 . O God and 
Father, thou art the Lord, thou art the Mind. Receive 
from me oblations reasonable as thou would’st wish; for 
by thy Will all things have been perfected. 

Her. Send thou oblation, son, acceptable to God, the Sire 
of all; but add, my son, too, “through the Word” (Logos). 

Tat. I give thee, father, thanks for showing me to sing 
such hymns. 

22. Her. Happy am I, my son, that thou hast brought the 
good fruits forth of Truth, products that cannot die. 

And now that thou hast learnt this lesson from me, make 
promise to keep silence 64 on thy virtue, and to no soul, my 
son, make known the handing on to thee the manner of 
Rebirth, that we may not be thought to be calumniators 6 '. 

And now we both of us have given heed sufficiendy, both 
I the speaker and the hearer thou. 

In Mind 66 hast thou become a Knower of thyself and of 
our [common] Sire. 



63 Cf. above, § 18. 

64 Cf P. S. A., xxxii. 4. 

65 8ia(3o).oi, slanderers, calumniators; compare § 13; also Ex. i. 16. 

66 voegfi)?. 


- 151 - 



COMMENTARY 


CONCERNING THE TITLE 

“The Secret Sermon on the Mountain” is the main title given in all the MSS., 
with the exception of A; the subsidiary contents-title is evidently derived from the 
same edition to which we owe the other contents-titles preserved in our Corpus. 
Reitzenstein (p. 193), however, thinks that the main title has arisen by mistake. 
What the mistake is he does not tell us; perhaps he means that in our Sermon there 
is no mention of “ On a Mountain,” but rather, as in § 1, if we accept his reading, of 
“Down a Mountain.” But in this we cannot follow him; for the whole teaching is 
precisely “On the Mount” - to the top of which Tat has now come. For the 
“Mountain” was symbolic of stages of inner development, and in § 9 we are told 
precisely: “This step (the fifth) is Righteousness’ firm seat,” - showing that the 
Mountain was conceived as an ascent or stair of steps as is so often seen in 
Egyptian frescoes. 


THE TERM APOCRYPHON 

Again, with regard to the title, the term “Secret” (anoxQupoi; - apocryphal) is 
used in its original sense of hidden away, meaning esoteric or not put into 
circulation, as applied to a logos or sermon, or a collection of logoi or sayings. 

A logos in this sense had very much the same meaning for our Ancients as the 
Sanskrit maha-vakyam (“great saying”) has to-day for an Indian theosophist who 
applies the term to the great mystical utterances of the Upanishads; such as: “That 
art thou” (Tat tv am asi ), etc. 

In classical antiquity these logoi or logia were regarded as words of wisdom, and 
were the most sacred legacies of the sages to humanity. These oracular utterances 
were frequently collected together, and even prior to the days of syncretism formed 
the most sacred “deposits” (8ia0rjxcu) of various nations; the same term being 
subsequently given to the Christian Bible. 

Thus Herodotus calls Onomacritus, the first collector of the archaic Orphic 
Hymns, a “depository of oracles” (8icc0bt7]v yqqajiCOv), - the word carrying the 
meaning of “one who arranges,” corresponding exactly to the term Vyasa in 
Sanskrit, the supposed “author” of the Mahdbharata. 

Such collections of logoi or logia were then generally called “deposits,” the word 
also sometimes bearing the meaning of “testaments” as containing the expression 
of the Divine will or dispensation. The same term is used by Strabo (x. 482) of the 
Laws of Lycurgus; it was also applied by the Orphics and Pythagoreans to such 
sacred laws 67 ; while Ecclesiastical writers subsequently used it in reference to the 
Canonical Books 66 . 


67 Grotius, ap. Jablonski, ii. 397; Lobeck, Aglaoph., p. 714. 

68 Euseb., Chron., 99 A. 


- 152 - 



The Orphics and Pythagoreans also called these collections “sacred utterances” 
(knot koyoi) ; and even Clement of Alexandria refers to such a saying of Orpheus as 
“that truly sacred utterance” (xdv Ovxooc; Ispdv koyov). 

That such collections were kept secret is not surprising; indeed, such must have 
been the case from time immemorial. But even on the ground of purely Greek and 
Roman history, we are not without information of collections of oracles carefully 
guarded as the secret scriptures or bibles of nations. 

Cicero 69 speaks of such a bible of the Veii. The Athenians, in the time of the 
Kings, possessed a similar bible of logia 70 \ and Dinarchus 71 tells us that the safety of 
the State depended on this secret scripture (d7ioppf]xouq 8ioc0fjxcc<;) These occult 
sayings (a7io0svxcc 87trj) are further called by Suidas (s.v.) “withdrawn volumes” 
((3i(3kia &vaxsyoop7]x6xoc) - that is to say, books withdrawn from public perusal, or, 
in other words, apocryphal, hidden or secret (dxoxpupa). 

And not only was this the case with the ancient writings themselves, but also 
with the commentaries upon them, and by degrees with everything referring to 
them, until finally we find Themistius the rhetorician, in the fourth century, 
speaking of that “mass of Archaic wisdom not open to the public or in general 
circulation, but scarce and occult.” 2 

We have, therefore, translated the term by “secret” as conveying the proper 
meaning of the epithet in the title, and not by “apocryphal,” a word that nowadays 
connotes the judgment of a theological canon. 

THE THREE STAGES OF PROBATION 

1. In the first paragraph Tat definitely refers to three Stages of Probation, before 
he is deemed fit to hear the Sermon on Rebirth. 

(i) First there is the General or Preliminary Instruction contained in a collection 
of discourses called the General Sermons (Tsvixoi Aoyoi). 

(ii) Next is the Stage where Tat becomes the Suppliant of Hermes, a stage 
characterized by Conversation or Dialogue (8iccksy0fjvou); that is to say, Tat was 
allowed to ask questions. This is further symbolically described by a phrase, 87ii xrjc 
xoh Oqouc [XExa'SdaEOJC, which is difficult to translate, but which seems to mean 
either Passing up, or Wending up, the Mountain, or Wending over the Mountain. 
That is to say, that Hermes was gradually leading Tat to the top of the Mountain, in 
plain words, as far as his normal intellect could carry him; the Top of the Mountain 
representing the highest point of unaided mental faculty. 

This stage was, I believe, represented by the collection of Sermons to Tat, or 
Dialogues with Tat, known as the Ais^oSixoi Aoyoi - a term somewhat difficult to 
translate precisely. 

The fundamental meaning of 8is ^o8oq is a “way through and out,” a “pathway” 
or “passage,” or “means of escape.” It thus comes to mean the course of a 


69 De Div., i. 44. 

70 Herod., v. 90. 

71 Or. c. Demos., 91, 20. 

72 Or., IV. 60: “axupo? ag^aia? aotpia?, ov> xoivrp ot)8s ev frsacp xuXiv8oo[Aevr]<; aXka eraaviou xai anoderou.” 


- 153 - 



narrative, or a detailed narrative, exposition, discussion. Hence also a “passage” of 
Scripture. As set over against yevixbc, (General), therefore, Sis^oSixOc; would mean 
Detailed or Expository; but at the same time it would to the Greek ear suggest the 
meaning of the Means of Escape or the Way out of Ignorance. 

(iii) The third Stage is that of Moral and Mental Purification. “Wherefore I got 
me ready and made the thought (to ppovypa) in me a stranger to the world- 
illusion” (xfjq xoti xoctjiou 6l7cdr/]c) - the Error that in § 7 sums up the first six vices, 
and is in § 9 driven out by Truth. 

Stage ii. may have been technically known as that of the Suppliant, though, of 
course, of this we cannot be sure. In any case the term must be considered in close 
connection with Philo’s treatise On the Contemplative Eife, which, as Conybeare tells 
us, most probably formed Book IV. of Philo’s voluminous work, or rather apology, 
De Eegatione. The alternative title of this work was The Suppliants. By “Suppliant” 
Philo tells us he means “one who has fled to God and taken refuge with Him.” 7 ’ 

Here, however, the term is used in a narrower sense, as adapted to the personal 
relationship of disciple to master, who, during the time of probation, stands to him 
as the representative of God. The master is his spiritual father, the image of God 
the Father 74 . 


THE HOLY MOUNT OF INITIATION 

As to the symbolic use of the term Mountain, I need hardly remind my readers 
that it was perhaps the most common figure employed in the apocalypses of the 
time. Instances come immediately crowding into the mind, such as the “Mount of 
Galilee” in the Askew and Bruce Gnostic Codices, on which all the great initiations 
and rites are performed by the Risen Lord; or the Mount Tabor 75 of The Gospel 
according to the Hebrews, “My Mother the Holy Spirit took me by one of the hairs of 
the head and carried me unto Mount Tabor”; or in the Acts of John, where the 
Vision of the Spiritual Crucifixion is shown to John on the Mount; or in The Gospel 
of Eve, where the Vision of the Great and Little Man is seen on the Mount; or in 
The Shepherd of Hennas, where the Angel of Repentance bears off Hermas to the 
Mount of Arcadia, etc. In every case the Mountain is no physical mountain, but the 
height of contemplation, an interior state of spiritual consciousness. 

Stage iii., again, is of interest because of the terms in which it is described; they 
may be compared with the same teaching in the Behnesa logos : 

Jesus saith: “Except ye fast to the world, ye shall in nowise find the Kingdom of 
God.” 

Again, in Tat’s prayer for the consummation of his probation: “And now do 
thou fill up the things that fall short in me” (xa tiaTEpypaxa avoc7iky]pooaov), it 
should be noticed that we have the well-known technical terms of the Christianized 
Gnosis, the Pleroma and Hysterema, or Fullness and Insufficiency. 


73 De Sac. Ab. et C., i. 186, 33. 

74 See the praise-giving of Tat, § 21. 

75 “The Mountain of Light,” the traditional scene of the Transfiguration. 


- 154 - 



THE BIRTH FROM ABOVE 


The time has come for Tat to receive, through his master, the touch of the true 
Mind-consciousness, the Christ is to be born in his heart, the light of the Pleroma 
is to shine into his inmost being. It is to be a New Birth, a Regeneration 
(naXiyyeveoiq), or Re-birth (av<xyevvr\oiq), in the sense of being born from Above 
(avoo0sv). 

Compare John iii. 3: “Amen, Amen, I say unto thee; Except a man be born from 
Above, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.” And also 7: “Marvel not that I said 
unto thee, Ye (pi) must be born from Above,” - where the comment on a prior 
saying, “Ye must be born from Above,” formally unsuited to the scheme of a 
dialogue between Jeschu and Rabbi Nakdimon, reveals the work of the Haggadist. 

So also in 1 Pet. i. 22, 23: “Having made your souls holy by hearkening to the 
Truth . . 76 . . being Re-born (ayayzyzvvr^zvoi) not from the seed of destruction, 
but from the Seed that cannot be destroyed, through the Word 7 ( (Logos ) of God, 
who lives and endures.” 78 

These passages from the New Testament Scriptures are not, of course, cited to 
show any dependence of our Hermetic authors on the New Testament writers; but 
simply to show how they mutually explain one another. For indeed the doctrine of 
the New Birth and of the Sacred Marriage was beyond all else the crowning 
mystery of the Spiritual Way for all the mystic schools of the time 79 . 

THE VIRGIN BIRTH 

2. The secret that Tat would learn is the Mystery of the Birth from the Virgin 
Womb - the Birth of Man, the Great Mystery of Regeneration. Many illustrations of 
the meaning of this pivot-doctrine of the Christian teaching might be quoted from 
Gnostic writings, but it will be sufficient to remind the reader of what the Jewish 
Commentator in the Naassene Document (§ 28) has written in contrasting the 
Great Mysteries (or the heavenly ones) with the Little Mysteries (those of fleshly 
generation). Speaking of the Mysteries of Regeneration, he writes: 

“For this is the Gate of Heaven, and this is the House of God, where the Good 
God dwells alone; into which no impure [man] shall come, but it is kept under 
guard for the spiritual alone, - where when they come, they must cast away their 
garments, and all become bridegrooms, obtaining their true manhood, through the 
Virginal Spirit. For this is the Virgin big with child, conceiving and bearing a Son.” 

And to this the Christian Commentator adds: - “not psychic, not fleshly, but a 
blessed TEon of TEons.” 


76 Precisely as did Tat. 

77 Cf. precisely the same formula in our treatise, § 21. 

78 That is, of God as iEon and God as Life, which is the union of God as Mind and Logos. 

79 The antiquity of the ideas connected with this spiritual mystery may be seen from what Reitzenstein (pp. 227 ff.) 
has to say concerning mystic auvouola or congress; of it, as perhaps of nothing so much in the world, may it be said 
cormptio optimi pessima. 


- 155 - 



The Jewish Commentator uses the language of Philo, who, as we have shown, 
centred his ideas round the conception of the Sacred Marriage and the Virginal 
Spirit. 

So, too, does our treatise. The Womb is Silence, the silence of contemplation, 
the image of the Great Silence the Mother of the /Rons in many a Christianized 
Gnostic System; the Matter is Wisdom; the /Eon’s coming to consciousness in man 
is the Birth of Man the Son of God; and the Seed is the Good or Logos sown by 
the Will of the Father. This is the Birth of the Christ in man, the Great Mystery 
that awaits us when we have made ourselves strangers to the world-illusion. 

Is this Son then, asks Tat, other than God? No, answers Hermes; it is the 
Mystery of Sameness, not of Difference; it is the Pleroma, not the Insufficiency, - 
“All in all, out of all powers composed,” the Common Fruit of the Pleroma, as the 
Valentinians would have expressed it. 

THE RACE OF THE LOGOS 

It is a Race, not an individual; it is We and no longer I s ". This is the Race of the 
Logos; the Self-taught Race of Philo; or, as Hermes says: “This Race, my son, is 
never taught, but when He willeth it, its memory is restored by God.” 

This is the avapvyrnc of Pythagoras and Plato, - the regaining of the 
consciousness of the Divine State; it must be self-perceived. And so Philo tells us: 

“But as for the Race of Devotees who are taught ever more and more to see, let 
them strive for the intuition of That-which-is; let them transcend the sun which 
men perceive [and gaze upon the Light beyond, the 

True Sun or Logos], nor ever leave this rank which leads to Perfect Blessedness. 
Now they who betake themselves to the [Divine] Service, [do so] not because of 
any custom, or some one’s advice or appeal, but are carried away by Heavenly Love.” 81 

They are of the Race of Elxai, the Hidden Power or Holy Spirit, the Spouse of 
Iexai, the Hidden Lord or Logos 82 . 

THE SELF-TAUGHT 

3. Hermes cannot teach to Tat this Birth in words, even as Isis is not permitted 
to declare it openly to Horus (K. K, 36): 

“I may not tell the story of this Birth; for it is not permitted to describe the origin of 
thy descent, 0 Horns, son of mighty power, lest afterward the Way-of-Birth of the 
immortal Gods should be known unto men ” - that is, the Mystery of the Birth of 
Horus. 

Hermes can only guide Tat towards the realisation of the Blessed Sight, by 
putting himself into that sublime state of consciousness, so that Tat, so to speak, 
bathes, or is baptized in, his master’s spiritual presence, the Cup of the Mind. This, 
as we have seen already from several treatises, was the way of transmission of the 
Power of the powers, the true Laying-on of Hands. 


80 Compare the Song of the Powers in Pistis Sophia (pp. 16, 17), where the “We” alternates with the “I.” 

81 D. V.C., M. 473, 10; P. 891. 

82 See D.J.L., pp. 374, 375. 


- 156 - 



Hermes describes the change that takes place in himself when he passes into the 
higher spiritual consciousness. He seems to “pass through himself’ - to “involve” 
himself, as it is said somewhere in the Mahdbhdrata of the Rishis - “into a Body that 
can never die,” that is, into a, or rather the , Essential or Cosmic Body 8 ’, that 
embraces the cosmos within it. The way to do this is not taught, for it cannot be 
understood from any sensible experience, the outer physical form of the adept 
remaining as it was before. It is an inner change. The Birth of a Christ is the 
striking of a new keynote; everything remains apparently as it was before, but all 
things receive a new interpretation. 

No physical sight, even of the greatest intensity, can penetrate the Veil of this 
Mystery. 

“Thou seest me with eyes, my son; but what I am thou dost not understand.” 

With this compare the marvellous Ritual of Initiation in The Acts of John: 

“Who I am thou shalt know when I depart 84 . What I am seen to be, that am I 
not; but what I am, thou shalt see when thou comest.” 8 ’ 

None but those who have reached the Christ-state can know it; no teaching will 
avail to explain its manner and its mysteries. It must be realized. 

THE NEW CREATION 

4. But Tat, who has “made himself ready,” is becoming quickened by the power 
of his master. His spiritual senses are being born; already he is losing touch with the 
physical; he no longer sees himself. But this is not enough; he must not only be 
able to lose consciousness of his physical body, and see and hear as though with 
the mind alone, but he must “invert” himself, pass right through himself, and no 
longer see things as without him, but all tilings as within him. 

All this is a New Creation to be accomplished in the man himself. The Author or 
Genesiurge of Re-birth, as contrasted with the Maker or Demiurge of Birth, is the 
One Man, the Logos, the Energic Reason and Will of God; the one is the Creator 
of the Immortal Body, the other is the Maker of the mortal frame. 

THE WAY OF BIRTH IN GOD 

5. The reading of the next sentence is faulty, and it is impossible to extract the 
correct meaning. The “Greatness” (to jisyeGoq) and “distinctive form” (^apaxxf]p) 
are terms fami li ar enough to us in Christian Gnostic writings 86 . Greatness connotes 
the same idea as /Ron; “character” or “distinctive form” or “rank” is generally the 


83 Cf. R. 52. But compare especially § 6, and C. H., iv. (v.) 1. 

84 That is, when the Presence is withdrawn, - by contrast. 

85 Texts and Studies, V. i. 14. 

86 The term “Greatness,” however, is probably of Egyptian derivation. In the Papyrus Insinger, written somewhere 
during the last half of the first century B.C. and first half of the first century A.D., according to Spiegelberg, God’s 
Wisdom and Providence are praised (coll, xxxv., xxxvi.). The superscription of this section runs: “The Four-and- 
Twentieth Teaching: The Instruction: Learn the Greatness of God, that thou mayest let it come into thine heart” 
(xxxv. 17); and later on: “He knoweth the Blasphemer who thinketh wickedness, He knoweth the Pious with the 
Greatness of God in his heart. The tongue, before even it is questioned - its words God knoweth” (xxxvi. 3-5). This 
is further explained by the sentence: “Thoth is heart and tongue of the Pious; lo! his house is God!” (xxxv. 19). R. 
237. 


- 157 - 



impression from a typical original, and here stands for the form by which a man is 
recognised. 

6. Hermes then proceeds to describe the nature of this Greatness or fEon, or 
Sameness, manifested in difference. It is, alchemically speaking, the One Element, 
which can only be comprehended by one Born in God - that is, by a God. 

7. The way of this Birth is then described as a de-energizing, or throwing out of 
work of the body’s senses, with a corresponding energizing of the One Sense, the 
/Ronic Consciousness; or as a purging out of the tendencies of the lower nature, 
and replacing them by the energies of the Divine Powers. 

This is the Mystery of Repentance (jxexocvola), not a change of mind only, but a 
change throughout the whole nature; all things in the man turn towards God. 

The forces or energies of the soul have no direction in themselves; it is the will 
of man that can turn them “downwards” or “upwards,” so that they become vices 
or virtues. 


OF THE TEN AND THE TWELVE 

8. But not only does Hermes set forth a formal exposition of this Repentance in 
terms of the conquest and driving out of the Horde of Vices by the Company of 
Virtues, but at the same time he performs an efficacious theurgic rite of invocation 
whereby he enables Tat to realize the instruction in immediate experience. 

The Virtues that Hermes invokes are not abstractions, but definite substantial 
powers; they are, in fact, the “filling up” of Tat’s “insufficiency”; in other words, 
they are what the Christian Gnostics would have called the /Rons of the Pleroma. 

Behind all there is a definite scheme of numbering. There is a Twelve and a Ten 
and a Seven and a Three and a One. 

The Torments of the Darkness are the Twelve; they are not torments in 
themselves, but only for him who is in Error. They are Twelve yet are they one, for 
though they are “pantomorph” or “omniform,” yet are they of one nature; the 
Twelve are thus conditioned by the main irrational “types of life,” or animal 
natures, - the so-called zodiac. 

These divisions are not, however, fundamental, they are solely for man’s 
delusion or error; in action they are one - that is, they keep man in Error or 
Ignorance. Thus they can be regarded as one, or two, or three, or four, or six; and 
so combined and recombined. 

Twelve, then, is the nature of the “animal soul” in man - the number of his 
going-forth into externality. This out-going is arrested when man repents, and turns 
himself to return, to go within; the cosmogonical is transformed by the 
soteriological; the “enformation 8 according to substance” gives place to the 
“enformation according to gnosis.” As Ignorance characterized the Twelve, so does 
Gnosis characterize the Ten, the Perfect Number or Number of Perfection. 

The Going-forth was that of the multiplication of species - Twelve (3 X 4 or 2 X 
6); the Return is Ten, that is the Seven and the Three; and Seven is addition (3 + 4) 
and not multiplication. 


87 [Ed. Middle English term for to form or to shaped 


- 158 - 



Multiplication seems here to mean the generation, by two parents, of things of 
the same kind and power; while addition signifies the intensification of the same 
nature to a higher power. The Ten is “that which giveth birth to souls” - that is, 
human souls; and not only human souls, but, in its consummation, to divine souls. 

It may, perhaps, be of interest here to set down simple lists of the vices and 
virtues as given in our treatise, and to append to them the list of vices in C. H., i. 24 
and 26. 


1. Not- knowing. 

1. Gnosis. 

2. Grief. 

2. Joy. 

3. Intemperance. 

3. Self-control. 

4. Concupiscence. 

4. Continence. 

5. Unrighteousness. 

5. Righteousness. 

6. Avarice. 

6. Sharing-with-all. 

7. Error. 

7. Truth. 

8. Envy. 


9. Guile. 

8. The Good. 

10. Anger. 

9. Life. 

11. Rashness. 

10. Light. 

12. Malice. 


1. Growth and Waning. 

First Zone. 

2. Device of Evils. 

Second Zone. 

3. Guile of the Desires. 

Third Zone. 

4. Arrogance. 

Fourth Zone. 

5. Daring and Rashness. 

Fifth Zone. 

6. Getting Wealth. 

Sixth Zone. 

7. Falsehood. 

Seventh Zone. 

8. Those- that-are. 

Eighth. 

9. The Powers in a band. 

Ninth. 

1 0. The Father. 

Tenth. 


It is at once seen that the first seven virtues are arranged so as to be the direct 
antitheses of the first seven vices. The root of the Twelve is Ignorance; indeed, all 
the Twelve are permutations of Ignorance. They seem to be twelve, whereas they 
are but one in nature; again, not only are they twelve, but manifold (§ 12). 

Thus, for instance, Rashness and Wrath or Anger are but one, and so of the rest; 
the permutations are infinite. This may be seen from the septenary classification in 
“The Shepherd” treatise, where we have: Guile of the Desires (3), a combination of 
Guile (9) and Desire or Concupiscence (4); Device of Evils (2), a combination of 
Guile (9) and Malice (12); Unholy Daring and Rashness (5), a combination of 
Unrighteousness (5) and Rashness (11); Getting Wealth by evil means (6), a 


- 159 - 



combination of Guile (9) and Avarice (6). So also just as Anger (10) and Rashness 
(1 1) are one, so are Envy (8) and Avarice (6) but aspects of the same thing; and so 
again Intemperance (3) and Concupiscence or Desire (4), Grief (2) and Ignorance 
(1), etc. 

All are summed up in Ignorance, or Error, just as the seven virtues are summed 
up in Gnosis or Truth 88 . And just as Ignorance is the source of vice, so is 
Knowledge or Gnosis the beginning of Truth. Gnosis is not the end but the 
beginning of the Path, the end of it is God or the Good. 

The difference between the “Poemandres” arrangement and the categories of our 
treatise is conditioned by the fact that in the former the process of transformation 
in the case of a good man after death is described, whereas in the latter the Way of 
Rebirth in a living man is set forth. 

That the Virtues (and Vices, therefore) were categorized according to the 
fundamental numbers of the Gnosis may be seen in most systems of Christian 
Gnostic asonology; indeed, it was a common plan of the general Gnostic theosophy 
of the time. In our treatise we have set forth the manner of the immediate practical 
ethical realization of what might be taken by a superficial student of Gnostic 
asonology as an empty schematology of purely metaphysical abstractions 89 . These 
things, however, meant everything to the Gnostic; they were fullnesses - no 
abstractions, but transcendent realities. 

So also in the Shepherd of Hern/as (Vis. iii. 8, 7), just as in our treatise, we are 
presented with the Vision of a Band of seven Women, each the mother of the next, 
seven Virtues, called: Faith, Continence, Simplicity, Freedom- from-malice, 
Seriousness, Gnosis (87uaxf][xr|), Love. 

And not only do we have the Seven, but also the Twelve, twelve Maidens (Sim. 
xv. 1-3): Faith, Continence, Power, Long-suffering, Simplicity, Freedom-from- 
malice, Chastity, Joyfulness, Truth, Understanding, Concord, Love. 

To these are opposed twelve Women in dark robes: Infidelity, Incontinence, 
Disobedience, Error, Grief, Depravity, Wantonness, Quickness-to-wrath, 
Falsehood, Folly, Slander, Hate. 

Zosimus also speaks of the Twelve Fates (Motpca) of Death, and associates them 
with the Passions 90 . 

But, indeed, the subject is infinite, for it is the consummation of all right 
endeavour and all true progress in humanity. We must, then, leave it for the 
present, to avoid running to too great length in these comments. Sufficient for the 
moment to point to the fact that the Ten is not only the Wedding Garment of 
Purity, but also the Robe of Power or Glory. In its consummation also it is the 
Garment of the Christ, the One Robe without seam throughout, for the Ten 
contains the One, and the One contains the Ten. 


88 Cf. P. S. A., xxix. 2. 

89 The usual way, indeed, in which it is taken. 

90 Berthelot, 244; R. 214. 


- 160 - 



THE DAWN OF COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS 


13. The result of this Potent Invocation of the Powers, - that is to say, the 
realization of the full meaning of the sacred rite which consummates itself in the 
consciousness of Hermes, and so communicates itself in some measure to Tat 91 , - is 
that Tat begins to “see”; “I see the All, I see myself in Mind.” 

“In heaven am 1 , in earth, in water, air; I am in animals, in plants; I’m in the 
womb, before the womb, after the womb, - I’m every where” (§ 11). 

Compare this with C. H., xi. (xii.) 22, where Hermes is himself being taught by 
Mind: 

“ Collect into thyself all senses of all creatures, - of fire, and water, dry and moist. 

Think that thou art at the same time in every place, in earth, in sea, in sky; not yet 
begotten, in the womb, young, old and dead, in af ter- death conditions. ” 

This is, as we have seen, a pure Egyptian formula, and connotes the opening of 
the “cosmic consciousness.” 

This consciousness, whatever else it may be, is a transcending of our three- 
dimensional limitation of consciousness, - that of the “body’s view-point, - a tiling 
three ways in space extended.” 


THE VOW OF SILENCE 

The mystery of this New Birth in consciousness is to be kept secret; therefore 
Hermes has not commented on it, presumably in the Expository Sermons; 
moreover, it must even now be kept secret (§ 22), and therefore is the treatise a 
Secret Sermon. The reason for this is given both here and in § 22: “That we may 
not be thought to be calumniators” (8ia(3okoi), by the Many or Unknowing. What 
may be the precise meaning of this phrase I do not know, and can only speculate. 

Those who had reached the full grade of Hermes are to keep silence on their 
“virtue” or power (§ 22); they were never to boast of their Gnosis. If they did, it 
would only bring the Gnosis into contempt; for they would still appear as ordinary 
men, would probably often say and do things, when they were not in the higher 
state of consciousness, which fell below the standard of their high ideals, and so 
they would be slanderers or calumniators of the Gnosis before the world. 

14. The New Birth is further characterized as the Essential Birth (fj ol)moj8r]c 
ysveaiq); it was the birth of the Essential Man, the God, Son of the One, to which 
other treatises refer 92 . 


OF THE OGDOAD 

15. Tat now desires to hear the Praise-giving of the Powers, which only those 
can sing who have reached the stage called Eighth, or the Ogdoad; this is the state 
above the Harmony or the Hebdomad of Fate (C H., i. 26). The man is now free 
and no longer a slave. It is the power of prophetic hymnody, for the man now 


91 Cf.C.H., i. 7; xi. (ixi.) 6. 

92 Cf. P. S. A., vii. 2. 


- 161 - 



hears the True Harmony of things and is above the Concatenation of Difference; it 
is the state “that keeps the soul in tune.” He who has reached this height can ever 
sing in tune; it is the state of the Hearer of the Eternal Praise-giving, and those who 
reach it can express it infinitely, each in his own fashion. 

The idea of the Ogdoad is represented in many a Christian Gnostic system, 
especially in the Valentinian tradition, which has many Egyptian elements in it. 

So we read in the Excerpts from Theodotus appended to the writings of Clement of 
Alexandria: 

“Him whom the Mother 4 brings to birth, she leadeth unto Death and to the 
world; but him whom Christ brings to rebirth, He changeth into Eife, unto the 
Ogdoad.” 94 

Many were the names given to the Ogdoad by the Christian Gnostics, - such as 
the Jerusalem Above, Wisdom, the Land flowing widi milk and honey, the Holy 
Spirit, the Land of the Lord, the Mesotes. 

These terms were, however, with the exception of the last, Jewish synonyms; the 
term Ogdoad itself was in all probability Egyptian. Thus in one of the Magic Papyri 
we read: 

‘Having known the power of the book, thou shalt hide it, my son. For in it there 
is stored the Authentic Name, which is the Name Ogdoad, - He who doth order and 
doth regulate all things. ’ 05 

A HYMN FOR MORNING AND FOR EVENING PRAYER 

1 6. The Hymn that follows is to be kept secret - that is to say, it is to be taken by 
Tat as an example of the form of prayer he is now to use in his private devotions, 
and is therefore probably intended to replace some other form of prayer which he 
had hitherto been using, as was the custom in such communities. 

The instruction to use it at sunset and sunrise, in the open air, reminds us of the 
appended passages to “The Shepherd” treatise, where we read (§ 29): 

“And when even was come and all sun’s beams began to set, I bade them all give 
thanks to God.” 96 

Compare also what Philo tells us of the Therapeuts: 

“Twice a day, at dawn and even, they are accustomed to offer up prayers; as the 
sun rises praying for the sunshine, the real Sunshine, that their minds may be filled 
with Heavenly Eight, and as it sets praying that their soul, completely lightened of the 
lust of the senses and sensations, may withdraw to its own Congregation and Council- 
chamber, there to track out Truth. ” 97 

So also Apollonius of Tyana is said to have prayed and meditated three times a 
day: at daybreak (Phil., V. A., vi. 10, 18; vii. 31), at mid-day (vii. 10), and at 


93 Sc. the Lower Mother, Nature. 

94 Ex: x. ex Theodot., § 80 (ed. Dindorf, iii. 453). 

95 Leyden Papyms W. S., 139, 45 (Leemans); <f. also ibid., 141, 5; R. 54. For further comments on the Ogdoad, see 
Commentary on C. H., i. 26. 

96 Cf. also P. S. A., xli. 1. 

97 D. V. C., M. ii. 475; P. 893. 


- 162 - 



sundown (viii. 13); and with regard to “keeping silence on their virtue,” we are told 
of the Later Pythagoreans, of whom he was so conspicuous an example: 

“In particular they kept the rule of silence regarding the Divine Service [that is, the 
Gnosis], For they heard within them many Divine and unspeakable things on which 
it would have been difficult for them to keep silence, had they not first learned that it 
was just this Silence which spoke to them” (i. 1 )f 

And so the Hymn has to be heard in silence; all earthly sounds must be stilled 
for the Heavenly Harmony to be heard. 

17. It is to be noticed that in four out of the five MSS. the title “Secret 
Hymnody” is followed by the indication “Logos IV.” 

Reitzenstein (p. 345, n. 21) thinks that the three prior “Logoi” were: 

I. “Holy art Thou, O God” - C. H, i. 31, 32. 

II. “The Glory of all things is God” - C. H., iii. (iv.). 

III. “Whither stumble ye, sots?” - C. H., vii. (viii.). 

The latter two, however, are not hymns; the only other hymn in our Corpus 
being: 

“Who then may sing Thee praise of Thee?” - C. H., v. (vi.) 10, 11. 

Our Hymn is a Hymn to the Sun, it is true, but to the Spiritual Sun, not the 
physical orb of day. It is to the Eye of Mind that these orisons are addressed - to 
the All-seeing Light. 

Nor is this Eulogy a formal Te Deum, but a potent theurgic Praise-giving. All 
nature is to thrill with the joy of this thankfulness. 

Most beautiful is this Song of Praise, all of it, but we would specially call 
attention to the words: 

' Thy Reason sings through me Thy praises. Take back through me the All into 
Thy Reason - my reasonable oblation 19 ! From Thee Thy Will; to Thee the All!” 

The Outbreathing of the Universe through the Reason or Logos 100 is the 
manifestation or realisation of the Will of God. The Logos is Son, Will is Mother 
and God Father. 

The Inbreathing of the Universe is through Man (“Thy Man thus cries to Thee,” 
§20): “Take back through Me the All.” This is accomplished in the first instance by 
the sacrifice of the reason, of man’s small limited reason, to the Great Reason of 
things. 

And yet the All, the Universe itself, is not something other than God; it is all 
God. 

“ From Thee Thy Will”; Thou art the Source of all. “ To Thee the All”; Thou art the 
End of all, the Desirable One, The Good. 

Compare with this the Hymn in the Jewish deposit of the Naassene Document: 


98 See my Apollonius ofTyana, pp. 123 and 120. 

99 Cf. 1 Pet. ii. 5: “Ye also as living stones are built up, a spiritual house for holy service, to offer up spiritual oblations 
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ,” And also Rom. xii. 1: “I beseech you, therefore, brethren, to present your 
bodies as a living oblation, holy, well-pleasing unto God, - your reasonable service.” 

10,1 Hesychius in his Lexicon defines Logos as the “Cause of Activity,” or that which underlies action, - lj ton 
Sgapato? UTtoOsai?. 


- 163 - 



“Fro/// Thee is Father, and Through Thee Mother, - the two Immortal Names, 
Parents of /Rons, O Thou who hast the Heaven for thy City, O Man of Mighty 
Names!” 

Also notice: “The All that is in us, O Life, preserve; O Light, illumine it; O God, 
in-spirit it!” And compare it with § 12, where we are told: “While Life and Light are 
unified there, where the One hath being from the Spirit.” 

The Prayer is for the Baptism of Light - Illumination by the Gnosis 101 ; this was 
the Dowsing in the Mind of “The Cup” treatise, even as true Baptism in primitive 
Christianity was called Illumination or pomapoc. 

“THROUGH THE WORD” 

21. Tat now feels himself impelled to utter praises himself. He says what he feels. 
His master has given him the impulse, has made the conditions for him whereby he 
is conceived as a Child of God, a Prophet. But as yet he is not grown into the 
stature of a true Seer. His higher nature has received the germ, but this must have 
time to develop, and only gradually will its power descend into his lower mind. 

At present his thankfulness is poured forth to his master, who has performed the 
theurgic rite of initiation (“All tilings have been perfected”) for him. 

But Hermes restrains him; it is not to the master that his thanks are due, but to 
God. And if he cannot as yet give thanks direct to God, then let him send those 
thanks - “acceptable oblations” - to God “Through the Word.” 

And that this was and is the practice of universal Christendom requires no 
pointing out; - the most striking parallel to the wording of our treatise being 1 Pet. 
ii. 5: “Spiritual oblations acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.” 

Tat has now passed from the rank of Hearer to that of Knower; he is now a true 
Gnostic: “Thou hast become a Knower of thyself, and of our Sire.” 

Compare logos 2 of the latest found Sayings at Oxyrhynchus: 

“( Strive therefore?) to know yourselves, and ye shall know ye are Sons of the 
(almighty?) Father; (and?) ye shall know that ye are in (the City of God? 102 ), and ye 
are (the City? 103 ). ” 


101 Compare yvcoai? ayicn, tpwxiahsi? ano ao\5 (§ 18); cpakiip tpw? (§ 19); Eracpcoxiaxai pou 6 vofp (§ 21). 

102 Sc. the Ogdoad. 

103 Cf. 1. Pet. ii. 5: “Ye are built up as living stones, a spiritual house for service.” 


- 164 - 



+- - » 

CORPUS HERMETICUM XIV. (XV.) 

[A LETTER] OF THRICE- GREATEST HERMES TO ASCLEPIUS 

UNTO ASCLEPIUS GOOD HEALTH OF SOUL ! 1 

(Text: P. 128-134; Pat . 49, 50.) 

1 . 

INCE in thy absence my son Tat desired to 
learn the nature of the things that are, and would 
not let me hold it over, as [natural to] a younger 
son fresh come to gnosis of the [teachings] on each single 
point, - I was compelled to tell [him] more, in order that 
the contemplation 2 3 [of them] might be the easier for him 
to follow. 

I would, then, choosing out the chiefest heads of what 
was said, write them in brief to thee, explaining them 
more mystic-ly 7 , as unto one of greater age and one well 
versed in Nature. 

2. If all things manifest have been and are being made, 
and made things are not made by their own selves but by 
another; [if] made things are the many , - nay more, are all 
things manifest and all things different and not alike; and 
things that are being made are being made by other [than 
themselves]; - there is some one who makes these things; 
and He cannot be made, but is more ancient than the 
things that can. 

For things that can be made, I say, are made by other 
[than themselves]; but of the things that owe their being 
to their being made, it is impossible that anything should 
be more ancient than them all, save only That which is not 
able to be made. 



1 eu tpgovsvv. I do not know the exact meaning of this expression. Everard translates “to be truly wise”; Parthey, “recte 
sapere’ following Patrizzi; Menard, “sagesse”; Chambers, “to be rightly wise.” I would suggest that ev> cpgovslv was the 
form used among these disciples of the Inner Way for the usual yaigsiv. Instead of wishing one another happiness, 
they wished each other wisdom, good thought, right thinking, good health of soul. 

2 Oswpla. 

3 That is to say, more fully and profoundly, as to one more advanced in the mystic science. 


- 165 - 


3. So He is both Supreme, and One, and Only, the truly 
wise in all, as having naught more ancient [than Himself]. 

For He doth rule o’er both the number, size and 
difference of things that are being made, and o’er the 
continuity of their making [too] . 

Again, things makeable are seeable; but He cannot be 
seen. 

For for this cause He maketh, - that He may not be able 
to be seen. 

He, therefore, ever maketh 4 5 ; and therefore can He ne’er 
be seen. 

To comprehend Him thus is meet; and comprehending, [it 
is meet] to marvel; and marvelling, to count oneself as 
blessed, as having learnt to know one’s Sire. 

4. For what is sweeter than one’s own true Sire? Who, 
then, is He; and how shall we learn how to know Him? 

Is it not right to dedicate to Him alone the name of God, 
or that of Maker, or of Father, or rather [all] the three; - 
God for His Power, and Maker for His Energy, and 
Father for His Good? 

Now Power doth differ from the things which are being 
made; while Energy consisteth in all things being made. 

Wherefore we ought to put away verbosity and foolish 
talk, and understand these two - the made and Maker. For 
that of them there is no middle [term] ; there is no third. 

5. Wherefore in all that thou conceivest, in all thou 
nearest, these two recall to mind; and think all things are 
they, reckoning as doubtful naught, nor of the things 
above, nor of the things below, neither of things divine, 
nor things that suffer change or things that are in 
obscuration'. 


4 Cf. C. H, xvi. 18. 

5 tCOv ev [xuxtt). I do not know what is the exact meaning of this expression. Everard translates “things that are in 
darkness or secret”; Parthey, “qua sunt in abdito”-, Menard, “dans les profondenrs ” ; Chambers, “those in secrecy.” I 
suggest that the technical term puyo?, signifying generally a shut-in or locked-up place ( conclave , as Damascius 
translates it), is to be referred, along the line of Platonic and Pythagorean tradition, to Pherecydes. Porphyry ( De 
Antro Njnrph., C. 31) tells us that the synonyms “puyoi (chambers?), recesses (or pits), caverns, doors, gates” were 


- 166 - 



For all things are [these] twain. Maker and made, and ’tis 
impossible that one should be without the other; for 
neither is it possible that “Maker” should exist without the 
“made,” for each of them is one and the same thing. 

Wherefore ’tis no more possible for one from other to be 
parted, than self from self. 

6. Now if the Maker is naught else but That which makes, 
Alone, Simple, Uncompound, it needs must do this 
[making] to Itself, - to Which its Maker’s making is “its 
being made”. 6 

And as to all that’s being made, - it cannot be [so made] 
by being made by its own self; but it must needs be made 
by being made by other. Without the “Maker” “made” is 
neither made nor is; for that the one without the other 
doth lose its proper nature by deprivation of that other. 

If 7 , then, all things have been admitted to be two, - the 
“that which is being made” and “that which makes,” - [all 
then] are one in union of these, - the “that which leadeth” 
and the “that which followeth.” 

The making God is “that which leadeth”; the “that which 
is being made,” whatever it be, the “that which 
followeth.” 

7. And do not thou be chary of things made because of 
their variety, from fear of attribution of a low estate and 
lack of glory unto God. 

For that His Glory’s one, - to make all things; and this is 
as it were God’s Body, the making [of them] 8 . 

But by the Maker’s self naught is there thought or bad or 
base. 


used by Pherecydes as symbolical expressions to signify “the geneses and apogeneses of souls,” whatever these terms 
may mean exactly. The “birth” and “decease” of a soul, in this connection, presumably mean its coming into the 
world of genesis out of the womb of the World-soul, and its reception back again into the bosom of the great 
Mother. If this be so, our text would seem to indicate that things are in two states, - in a state of change (that is, in 
the active condition), and again in a passive condition, in the state which Indian philosophers call laya or pralaya. See 
for the of Pherecydes Sturz’s Phereydis Fragmenta, pp. 43 ff. (Leipzig, 1824). 

6 Or genesis. 

7 From here to the end of the sermon, with the exception of the final sentences of § 7 and § 10, and the third 
sentence of § 9, and with a few very slight verbal variants, is quoted by Cyril, Contra Julianum, ii. 64 (Migne, col. 598 
D). 

8 Cf. C. H, xvi. 18. 


- 167 - 




These things are passions which accompany the making 
process, as rust doth brass and filth doth body; but neither 
doth the brass-smith make the rust, nor the begetters of 
the body filth, nor God [make] evil. 

It is continuance in the state of being made i that makes 
them lose, as though it were, their bloom; and ’tis because 
of this God hath made change, as though it were the 
making clean of genesis. 

8. Is it, then, possible for one and the same painter man to 
make both heaven, and gods, and earth, and sea, and men, 
and all the animals, and lifeless things, and trees, and yet 
impossible for God to make all things? 

What monstrous lack of understanding; what want of 
knowledge as to God! 9 

For such the strangest lot of all do suffer; for though they 
say they worship piously and sing the praise of God, yet 
by their not ascribing unto Him the making of all things, 
they know not God; and, added unto this not-knowing, 
they’re guilty even of the worst impiety to Him - passions 
to Him attributing, or arrogance, or impotency. 

For if He doth not make all things, from arrogance He 
doth not make, or not being able, - which is impiety [to 
think] . 

9. One Passion hath God only - Good; and He who’s 
Good, is neither arrogant nor impotent. 

For this is God - the Good, which hath all power of 
making all. 

And all that can be made is made by God, - that is, by 
[Him who is] the Good and who can make all things 10 . 

But would’st thou learn how He doth make, and how 
things made are made, thou may’st do so. 

10. Behold a very fair and most resemblant image - a 
husbandman casting the seed into the ground; here wheat, 
there barley, and there [again] some other of the seeds! 


9 Or genesis. 

10 This sentence, which appears to be very tautological, is omitted by Cyril. 


- 168 - 


Behold one and the same man planting the vine, the 
apple, and [all] other trees! 

In just the selfsame way doth God sow Immortality in 
Heaven, and Change on Earth, and Life and Motion in 
the universe. 

These are not many, but few and easy to be numbered; for 
four in all are they, - and God Himself and Genesis, in 
whom are all that are. 




..*7 VIS'* 

“ * cyi * 




COMMENTARY 

ASCLEPIUS AND TAT 

Fabricius, in his bibliotheca Grceca 11 , says that the title should be “On the Nature 
of the All,” and that he has recovered it from Cyril, C. Jul., ii., but I cannot verify 
this statement. 

The form of this treatise is different from any of the preceding, being that of a 
letter. It evidently belongs to the Asclepius-Tat type of tradition, as in C. H., x. (xi.): 
“My yesterday’s discourse I did devote to thee, Asclepius, and so ’tis only right I 
should devote to-day’s to Tat.” 

The distinction drawn between Tat and Asclepius is of interest; Tat is the 
younger, - who has only “just come to Gnosis of the teaching on each single 
point.” Can this mean that he has only just been permitted to share in the 
“Expository Sermons” or “Detailed Discourses”? It is probable, for C. H., x. (xi.) 1, 
continues: “And this the more because ’tis the abridgment (epitome) of the General 
Sermons which he has had addressed to him.” 

Asclepius is older, and already 87naxy]jioov xfp cpuasooc; - well-versed in the study of 
Nature. 

What may be the exact significance underlying these personifications it is very 
difficult to say; but the same facts, whatever they may have been, are clearly 
referred to in K K. (Stob., Ed, i. 49; p. 386, 24 W.); especially the later accession of 
“Asclepius” to the School, and the fact that “Tat,” because of his too great 
“youth,” could not have handed on to him the tradition of the complete or all- 
perfect contemplation (6/,ox£/vf]c Osoopicc) - that is, of the mathesis or gnosis, or, in 
other words, the “learning of the tilings that are, the contemplating of their nature 
and the knowing God” (C. H., i. 3); or the “being taught the nature of the all and 
the Supreme Vision” {ibid., 27). 


11 Ed. Harles (4th ed.), vol. i. lib. i. cap. vii. 


- 169 - 



This view of the tradition of the School seems to clash entirely with the other 
view set forth in C. H., xiii. (xiv.), where Tat has handed on to him the “manner of 
Rebirth,” but a probable explanation has already been attempted in the 
“Prolegomena,” chap, xvi.: “The Disciples of Thrice-greatest Hermes.” 

COMPARE WITH “MIND UNTO HERMES” 

The treatise itself requires little commentary; the similarity of its doctrine, 
however, with that of the “Mind unto Hermes” is remarkable. For instance, 
compare the last sentence of § 7 of our treatise with C. H., xi. (xii.) 14: “For that 
indeed He hath no other one to share in what He works, for working by Himself, 
He ever is at work, Himself being what He doth.” 

Compare also the first sentence of § 8 with C. H., xi. (xii.) 20: “Behold what 
power, what swiftness thou dost have! And canst thou do all of these things, and 
God not do them?” 


THE GOOD HUSBANDMAN 

With the Good Husbandman “image” (§ 10) compare: 

“Come unto me, Good Husbandman, Good Daimon, Harpocrates, Chnouphis . . 
. who rollest down the stream ofNilus, 12 and mingle st with the Sea . . . as man with 
woman. ” 13 

And in the Alchemical literature: 

“[Come then], and coming contemplate, enquire of Acharantus (?), the 
Husbandman, and learn of Him, what is it that is sown, and what that which is 
reaped; and thou shalt learn that he who soweth corn shall reap com also, and he who 
someth barley shall in like manner reap barley. ” 14 

So also Zosimus in the “Book Concerning the Logos”: 

“And that I tell thee truth, I call to witness Hermes, when he says: Go unto 
Achaab (?), the Husbandman, and thou shalt learn that he who soweth corn gives 
birth to com. ” 15 


12 The Heavenly River of fructifying essence. 

13 Abhandl. d. Berl. Akad. (1865), p. 120, 26; R. 143. 

14 Berthelot, p. 30. 

15 Berthelot, p. 89. 


- 170 - 





CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVI.) 

THE DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS UNTO KING AMMON 

THE PERFECT SERMON OF ASCLEPIUS UNTO THE KING 

(T ext: R. 348-354; Pat. at end. ) u ' 

1 . 

REAT is the sermon {logos) which I send to thee, 

O King - the summing up and digest, as it were, 
of all the rest. 

For it is not composed to suit the many’s prejudice, since 
it contains much that refuteth them. 

Nay, it will seem to thee as well to contradict sometimes 
my sermons too. 

Hermes, my master, in many a conversation, both when 
alone, and sometimes, too, when Tat was there, has said, 
that unto those who come across my books, their 
composition will seem most simple and [most] clear; but, 
on the contrary, as ’tis unclear, and has the [inner] 
meaning of its words concealed, it will be still unclearer, 
when, afterwards, the Greeks will want to turn our tongue 
into their own, - for this will be a very great distorting and 
obscuring of [even] what has been [already] written. 

2. Turned into our own native tongue 17 , the sermon {logos) 
keepeth clear the meaning 18 of the words {logoi) [at any 
rate] . 

For that its very quality of sound, the [very] power of the 
Egyptian names, have in themselves the bringing into act 
of what is said. 

As far as, then, thou canst, O King - (and thou canst [do] 
all things) - keep [this] our sermon from translation; in 
order that such mighty mysteries may not come to the 
Greeks, and the disdainful speech of Greece, with [all] its 



16 At the end after P. J. A., but the pages are unnumbered. 

17 This presumably means from the hieroglyphic into the demotic - xfj 7tocTQCpa SiaXsxxO) Eg(j.r]veu6(ji.evo?. 

18 Lit. the mind. 


- 171 - 


looseness, and its surface beauty 19 , so to speak, take all the 
strength out of 20 the solemn and the strong - the 
energetic 21 speech of Names. 

The Greeks, O King, have novel words, energic of 
“argumentation” [only]; and thus is the philosophizing of 
the Greeks - the noise of words. 

But we do not use words; but we use sounds full-filled 
with deeds. 

3. Thus, then, will I begin the sermon by invocation unto 
God, the universals’ Lord and Maker, [their] Sire, and 
[their] Encompasser; who though being All is One 22 , i and 
though being One is All; for that the Fullness of all things 
is One, and [is] in One, this latter One not coming as a 
second [One], but both being One. 

And this is the idea 2 ’ that I would have thee keep, through 
the whole study of our sermon. Sire! 

For should one try to separate what seems to be both All 
and One and Same from One, - he will be found to take 24 
his epithet of “All” from [the idea of] multitude, and not 
from [that of] fullness 23 - which is impossible; for if he 
part All from the One, he will destroy the All 26 . 

For all things must be One - if they indeed are One. Yea, 
they are One; and they shall never cease being One - in 
order that the Fullness may not be destroyed. 

4. See then in Earth a host of founts of Water and of Fire 
forth- spirting in its midmost parts; in one and the same 
[space all] the three natures visible - of Fire, and Water, 
and of Earth, depending from one Root 27 . 


19 Or, perhaps, smartness. 

20 Make jejune, so to say - s^ix r]Xov 7ioif]or]. 

21 That is, “words of power,” words that do things. 

22 Cf. R. 127, 3; and P. S. A., i. 1. 

23 Lit. mind. 

24 The construction is very elliptical; EKSs^apevoi; simply. 

25 That is, completeness, perfection, - TtXrjgupaxoi;. 

26 Cf. Plato, Soph., 259 D, E. 

27 Cf. P. S. A., iv. 1. 


- 172 - 


Whence, too, it 28 is believed to be the Treasury 29 of every 
matter. It sendeth forth of its 30 abundance, and in the 
place [of what it sendeth forth] receiveth the subsistence 
from above 11 . 

For thus the Demiurge 12 - I mean the Sun - eternally doth 
order Heaven and Earth, pouring down Essence 11 , and 
taking Matter up, drawing both round Himself and to 
Himself all things, and from Himself giving all things to 
all. 

For He it is whose goodly energies extend not only 
through the Heaven and the Air, but also onto Earth, 
right down unto the lowest Depth and the Abyss. 

6. And if there be an Essence which the mind alone can 
grasp 14 , this is his Substance 13 , the reservoir 16 of which 
would be His Light. 

But whence this [Substance] doth arise, or floweth forth, 
He, [and He] only, knows. 

Or rather, in space and nature, He is near unto Himself . . 
. though as He is not seen by us, . . . understand [Him] by 
conjecture 17 . 

7. The spectacle of Him, however, is not left unto 
conjecture; nay [for] His very rays 18 , in greatest splendour, 
shine all round on all the Cosmos that doth lie above and 
lie below. 


28 Sc. Earth. 

29 A magazine, a store-house, - xapieiov. The term “treasure” (0y]aaug6g) is found in most lavish use in the Greek- 
Coptic Gnostic works, and also in Christian Gnostic literature and Jewish Apocalyptic. 

30 Sc. matter’s. 

31 if|v avw6ev Utkxq^iv, - hyparxis, substance or subsistence, a word of frequent use and highly technical meaning with 
the last of the Neo-Platonists, especially with Proclus. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 2. 

32 Cf. P. S. A., xxix. 4. 

33 Lit. bringing or drawing down; xoexayeiv = dedncere, elicere - used frequently of magic arts. 

34 vot]xf] ouoia = intelligibilis essentia. 

35 oyxog = moles, mass, bulk, volume; in later philosophy it means “atom,” and may mean so here, of course in the 
philosophical and mystic and not in the physical sense. 

36 UTtoSo^ = receptaculum. 

37 The text is very corrupt. Patrizzi translates: “ Vel quia ipso loco, et natnra prope se ipsum existens, non a nobis conspicitur cogit 
nos per conjectnras intelligere ” - which certainly does not represent the Greek. Menard conjectures brilliantly but in entire 
emancipation from the text: “ Pour conrprendre par induction ce qui se derobe a notre vue, il faudrait etre pres de Ini et analogue a sa 
nature.” Reitzenstein discovers two lacunas in the text, but does not attempt to fill them. As the text stands, then, all 
attempt at translation seems hopeless. 

38 Lit. his very sight, - ahxf] f) ojay, that is, his rays, 6 Jug being used of the visual rays which were supposed by the 
science of the time to proceed from the eyes. Cf. Ex. vii. 4. 


- 173 - 



For He is stablished in the midst, wreathed with the 
Cosmos’ 9 , and just as a good charioteer, He safely drives 
the cosmic team 40 , and holds them in unto Himself 41 , lest 
they should run away in dire disorder. 

The reins are Life, and Soul, and Spirit, Deathlessness, and 
Genesis. 

He lets it, then, drive [round] not far off from Himself - 
nay, if the truth be said, together with Himself. 

8. And in this way He operates 42 all things. To the 
immortals He distributeth perpetual permanence; and 
with the upper hemisphere of His own Light - all that he 
sends above from out His other side 4 ’, [the side of him] 
which looks to Heaven - He nourisheth the deathless 
parts of Cosmos. 

But with that side that sendeth down [its Light], and 
shineth round all of the hemisphere 44 of Water, and of 
Earth, and Air, He vivifieth, and by births and changes 
keepeth in movement to and fro the animals 4 ’ in these 
[the lower] parts of Cosmos. . . . 

9. He changes them in spiral fashion, and doth transform 
them into one another, genus to genus, species into 
species, their mutual changes into one another being 
balanced - just as He does when He doth deal with the 
Great Bodies. 

For in the case of every body, [its] permanence [consists 
in] transformation. 

In case of an immortal one, there is no dissolution; but 
when it is a mortal one, it is accompanied with 
dissolution 46 . 


39 Wearing the Cosmos as a wreath or crown; the visible sun being regarded as a “head.” See “The Perfect Sermon.” 

40 Lit. car or chariot - agga. 

41 Lit. binds it to himself - avaStiaa? si? Eauxov. 

42 8r|fjuougY s ^- 

43 Lit. part. 

44 xuxo? = a, hollow, vase, or vessel. 

45 That is, those lives subject to death, as opposed to the immortals. 

46 Compare “Sermon to Tat,” I. (Menard). Cf. Stob., Eel, i. 61; 274, 24 W. 


- 174 - 



And this is how the deathless body doth differ from the 
mortal, and how the mortal one doth differ from the 
deathless. 

10. Moreover, as His Light’s continuous, so is His Power 
of giving Life to lives continuous, and not to be brought 
to an end in space or in abundance. 

For there are many choirs of daimons round Him, like 
unto hosts of very various kinds; who though they dwell 
with mortals, yet are not far from the immortals; but 
having as their lot from here unto the spaces of the 
Gods 47 , they watch o’er the affairs of men, and work out 
things appointed by the Gods - by means of storms, 
whirlwinds and hurricanes, by transmutations wrought by 
fire and shakings of the earth 48 , with famines also and with 
wars requiting [man’s] impiety, - for this is in man’s case 
the greatest ill against the Gods. 

11. For that the duty of the Gods is to give benefits; the 
duty of mankind is to give worship 49 ; the duty of the 
daimons is to give requital. 

For as to all the other things men do, through error, or 
foolhardiness, or by necessity, which they call Fate 011 , or 
ignorance - these are not held requitable among the Gods; 
impiety alone is guilty at their bar. 

12. The Sun is the preserver ' 1 and the nurse of every 
class' 2 . And just as the Intelligible World'’, holding the 
Sensible in its embrace, fills it [all] full, distending it with 
forms of every kind and every shape - so, too, the Sun 
distendeth all in Cosmos, affording births to all, and 
strengtheneth them. 

When they are weary or they fail, He takes them in His 
arms again. 


47 Lit. “the land of these” - that is, of the immortals. 

48 Cf. Ex. ix. 5. 

49 Or, to be pious. Cf. P. S. A., ix. 1. 

50 ei(juxg(jiiv7]v. 

51 OCOTt]Q. 

52 Or genus. 

53 Or Cosmos. 


- 175 - 



13. And under Him is ranged the choir of daimons - or, 
rather, choirs; for these are multitudinous and very varied, 
ranked underneath the groups of Stars ' 4 , in equal number 
with each one of them. 

So, marshalled in their ranks, they are the ministers of 
each one of the Stars, being in their natures good, and 
bad, that is, in their activities (for that a daimon’s essence 
is activity); while some of them are [of] mixed [natures], 
good and bad. 

14. To all of these has been allotted the authority o’er 
things upon the Earth; and it is they who bring about the 
multifold confusion of the turmoils on the Earth - for 
states and nations generally, and for each individual 
separately. 

For they do shape our souls like to themselves, and set 
them moving with them, - obsessing nerves, and marrow, 
veins and arteries, the brain itself, down to the very 
heart' 3 . 

15. For on each one of us being born and made alive, the 
daimons take hold on us - those [daimones] who are in 
service at that moment [of the wheel] of Genesis, who are 
ranged under each one of the Stars 36 . 

For that these change at every moment; they do not stay 
the same, but circle back again. 

These, then, descending through the body 37 to the two 
parts 58 of the soul, set it 39 awhirling, each one towards its 
own activity. 

But the soul’s rational part is set above the lordship of the 
daimons - designed to be receptacle of God. 

16. Who then doth have a Ray shining upon him through 
the Sun within his rational part - and these in all are few 


54 imo xaq TCbv aaTSgwv 7tXiv6i8a?. 7tXiv01g = 7tXiv01ov, and is used of any rectangular figure, and also of groups of stars 
as in Eratosth. apud Strab., II. i. 35; v. 36 (Lex. Sophocles); compare at tcov 7tXiv0iwv vnoygayai, the fields, or spaces, 
into which the Augurs divided the heavens, tenrpla , or regiones coeli (Lex. Liddell and Scott). 

55 Lit. viscera. 

56 Cf. P. S. A., xxxv. 2. 

57 Cf.C.H., xiii. (xiv.) 7. 

58 The two irrational parts, “passion” and “desire” (0up6? and Emhupia). 

59 The soul. 


- 176 - 



on them the daimons do not act; for no one of the 
daimons or of Gods has any power against one Ray of 
God. 

As for the rest, they are all led and driven, soul and body, 
by the daimons - loving and hating the activities of these. 

The reason {logos), [then,] is not the love that is deceived 
and that deceives 60 . 1 

The daimons, therefore, exercise the whole of this terrene 
economy 61 , 2 using our bodies as [their] instruments. 

And this economy Hermes has called Heimarmene 62 . 3 

17. The World Intelligible 63 , 4 then, depends from God; 
the Sensible from the Intelligible [World]. 

The Sun, through the Intelligible and the Sensible 
Cosmos, pours forth abundantly the stream from God of 
Good, - that is, the demiurgic operation. 

And round the Sun are the Eight Spheres, dependent 
from Him - the [Sphere] of the Non-wandering Ones, the 
Six [Spheres] of the Wanderers, and one Circumterrene. 

And from the Spheres depend the daimones; and from 
these, men. 

And thus all things and all [of them] depend from God 64 . 

18. Wherefore God is the Sire of all; the Sun’s [their] 
Demiurge; the Cosmos is the instrument of demiurgic 
operation. 

Intelligible Essence regulateth Heaven; and Heaven, the 
Gods; the daimones, ranked underneath the Gods, 
regulate men. 

This is the host 6 ' of Gods and daimones 66 . Through these 
God makes all things for His own self. 


60 This Eros is the lower love ( cf. C. H., i. 18: “love, the cause of death”), not the Divine Love who inspires Hermes 
in “The Perfect Sermon” and who is mentioned C. H., xviii. 14. 

61 8iobo]criv. 

62 Or, Fate; cf. C. H., i. 9; and P. J. A., xix. 

63 Or, Intelligible Cosmos. 

64 Cf. P. S. A., iv. 1 n.; and xix. 

65 Or army, or hierarchy. Compare the “soldier” degree of the Mithriaca. 

66 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 22; and P. S. A., v. 1. 


- 177 - 


And all [of them] are parts of God; and if they all [are] 
parts - then, God is all. 

Thus, making all, He makes Himself; nor ever can He 
cease [His making], for He Himself is ceaseless 67 . 

Just, then, as God doth have no end and no beginning, so 
doth His making have no end and no beginning 68 . 



COMMENTARY 

CONCERNING THE TITLE 

Patrizzi has run (xvi.) and (xvii.) together, under the title “Definitions of 
Asclepius - Book I.,” though he clearly saw that (xvii.) did not belong to (xvi.) by 
his remark, “ videntur sequentia ex alio libro sumptaP He also heads (xvii.) 1-10 
“Definitions of Asclepius - Book II.,” and 11-16 “D. of A. - Book III.,” though the 
contents have evidendy nodiing to do with such a title. 

In the MSS. a later hand has added to the general title a catalogue of contents as 
follows: 

“Of God; Matter; Evil; Fate; the Sun ; Intelligible Essence; Divine Essence; 

Man; the Economy of the Pleroma ; the Seven Stars; the Man after the Eikeness” 69 - 
for which largely irrelevant list Patriot substitutes the title: “Of the Sun and 
Daimons. ” 

Reitzenstein (p. 192) is of opinion that this contents-list, and also the similar 
headings in (xviii.), are due to some Byzantine scribe, who also foolishly 
interpolated (xvii.). 

But even to (xvi.) the title “Definitions of Asclepius” seems very inappropriate; 
while, on the other hand, we find Lactantius (D. I., ii. 5), in referring to the 
“incursions of daimones,” claiming that it was a doctrine also of Hermes, and 
adding: 

“Asclepius, his hearer, has also explained the same idea at greater length in that 
Perfect Sermon ’ which he wrote to the King ” 

This is quite definite, and the authority of Lactantius should perhaps be 
preferred to that of the MSS., but as the title would clash with “The Perfect 
Sermon” of Hermes to Asclepius, and as Lactantius may just possibly mean “in that 
initiatory sermon,” - the term pefectus being used in a general and not in an 


67 Cf. C. H., xiv. (xv.), 7 and 5. 

68 See Commentary to Frag. iv. (Lact., D. L, ii. 15). 

69 R. 348 n. 


- 178 - 



appellative sense, - I have kept the traditional title and placed that of Lactantius 
second. 

A TRADITION CONCERNING THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 

1. Like “The Key” - C. H., x. (xi.) - of Hermes, our treatise is an Epitome' 0 ; 
Asclepius has previously written a number of Sermons to the King. 

The reference to the “Conversations” between Hermes and Asclepius and Tat, 
sometimes when both the latter were present and sometimes with Asclepius alone, 
presupposes the existence of this class of Dialogue, and indicates that the 
Correspondence of Asclepius with the King is a later deposit of our literature 71 . 

This literary activity of Asclepius is claimed in the introduction to be authorized 
by Hermes, and, moreover, purports to have been originally written in Demotic 
Egyptian. In other words, the writer would have us believe that the Greek is a 
translation from Egyptian. This it clearly is not; and we can only conclude that the 
“prophecy” as to direct translation is a literary fiction of our author. 

2. On the other hand, it is highly probable that our author was in contact with a 
living tradition, to the effect that the Hermes -teaching was originally Egyptian, and 
that this was “interpreted” into Greek - that is, into Greek modes of thought, 
rather than “translated” in the ordinary sense into Greek. 

In any case, the contempt shown by our author for the Greek language and 
“philosophizing,” and his admiration for Hieroglyphic Egyptian as a “language of 
the Gods” - a magical tongue, that by its mantric power compelled the 
understanding of the hearer, by putting him in sympathy with the ideas pictured by 
the ideograms, or sounded forth by the “names of power” 72 - show that he was not 
only not a Greek, but also no lover of Greek Philosophy. 

This is exceedingly puzzling, seeing not only that the majority of the writers of 
our tractates are plainly deep students and lovers of Plato, but also that the author 
of our tractate himself also writes very much in the same style as they do. 

All of this seems to indicate that in his introduction he was using for his own 
purposes some tradition about the ancient Thoth-literature that was current in his 
time. A form of this tradition was also made use of by Philo of Byblus in the first 
century, when he makes the Phoenician priest Sanchuniathon discover the origin of 
the Phoenician cosmogony and mystery- teaching in the Books of Taautos, “whom 
the Egyptian called Thoyth, the Alexandrians Thoth, and the Greeks changed into 
Hermes.” 

Sanchuniathon, he says, “having come across the secret writings that had been 
discovered and brought from the shrines of the Temples of Ammon, - 
compositions which were not known to all, - practised by himself the science (xrjv 
[xa0r]CTtv) of all things.” 73 


70 Cf. also Ex. i. 16, and Comment. 

71 This deduction, however, has to be modified by the view we hold as to the authorship of the introduction. See 
Comment., § 5. 

72 Cf. R. 269. 

73 Ap. Euseb., Prop. Ei\, I. ix. 29. 


- 179 - 



Philo also professes to quote from one of the earliest priests of Phoenicia, a 
certain Thabion, who is said apparendy to have got his information from a writing 
of the Seven Kabiri, and of Asclepius, the pupil of Taautos. This Thabion asserted 
that Taautos was made King of Egypt by Kronos - that is, Ammon/ 4 

Here we are evidently in contact with certain traditions with regard to Thoth- 
Hermes, his ancestors and pupils, and secret writings. Presumably many such 
traditions were floating about, and were used according to the fancy and taste of 
Hellenistic writers for their own purposes. 

But there was also another tradition concerning a certain King Ammon, used in 
one form by Jamblichus, when he writes: 

“It was Hermes who first taught this Path [sc. the Way up to God]. And Bitys 7 ] 
the Prophet, translated [his teachings concerning it] for King Ammon, discovering 
them in the inner temple in an inscription in the sacred characters at Satis in Egypt. ” 76 
What our author and Jamblichus have in common is that there were certain 
secret teachings of Hermes in the Sacred Language of Ancient Egypt hidden away 
in the inner shrines of the temples, and that these were translated into the current 
Egyptian language of the time for a certain King Ammon. 

It must, then, have been some tradition of this kind that our author or writer had 
in mind; he would have it believed that he was writing in the style or according to 
the model of a certain literature. 

Who this King Ammon was can only be guessed at; but to my mind it is 
probable that the “translations” of Bitys were made in connection with the 
translation activity of Manetho for King Ptolemy, and this translation was into 
Greek. Our author, however, would refer it to some Egyptian King, and so seek to 
invoke the authority of a high antiquity for the treatise he was putting into 
circulation. 


A SPECULATION AS TO DATE 

5. What seems to differentiate our treatise from the rest of the tractates, is the 
prominence its author gives to the doctrine of the Sun as Demiurgic Orderer of all 
things, if his so to speak pantheistic form of Sun-worship is peculiarly Egyptian . 

Now if we remember the disdainful way in which Greek “philosophizing” is 
spoken of in the introduction, we may be tempted to take the sentence, “And if 
there be any essence which the mind alone can grasp” (§ 6), as a somewhat 
patronizing reference to the Intelligible World of Greek Philosophy, as also the 
analogy in § 12; but when we turn to §§ 17 and 18 the exposition fully adopts the 
doctrine of the Intelligible and Sensible Worlds. This is so irreconcilable a 
contradiction that one is almost compelled to believe that the introduction is by 
another hand altogether, and that our sermon proper begins with § 3. 

But even so, the sermon is addressed to some King or other - “The Perfect 
Sermon to the King” of Lactantius - without any further qualification. Who, 


74 Ibid., I. X. 38, 39. 

75 Cf. Zosimus (§ 8). 

76 De My st., viii. 5. 

77 Cf.R. 198,1; and also Comment on § 17 below. 


- 180 - 



however, this King may have been historically must remain a matter of pure 
conjecture. 

7. When, then, Reitzenstein, pointing to § 7, says that the symbolism of the Sun 
as a charioteer wearing a crown of rays corresponds with that of the pictures of the 
Aurelian Sun-god, and adds further it is the Roman Empire-god of the third 
century, we are quite prepared to acknowledge a similarity of symbolism. But if it is 
intended to suggest that, therefore, we are to date our document by this similarity, 
it must be admitted that the indications are far too vague; for the symbolism of the 
Sun as the ray-crowned charioteer is fundamental with the cult of Mithras, and is 
found in Greece long before the Aurelian period. 

THE DELINEATION OF THE SUN 

It is interesting, however, here to notice that the Sun is “wreathed with cosmos,” 
and to compare this with the passage concerning the Macro-prosopus in the 
Untitled Apocalypse of the Coptic Gnostic Codex Brucianus, and especially with the 
sentence: 

“The Hair of His Head is the number of the Hidden Worlds, and the Outline of 
His Face is the Type of the TEons.” 78 

In this Untitled Apocalypse there is a strong Egyptian under- colouring; that, 
however, the idea of a crown of powers was pre-eminently Egyptian may be seen 
from many a passage in the Pistis Sophia. 

8. It is also of interest to notice that the delineation of the Sun in § 8 reminds us 
of the Orphic Phanes, especially the reference to the two hemispheres above and 
below, - the two parts of the Egg in Orphic symbolism. 

9. The hint that the sun-life runs in some sort of spiral or serpentine fashion in 
animals, and that this also is the case with the Great Bodies or Celestial Animals, is 
of interest. 


CONCERNING THE DAIMONES 

10. Our author then proceeds to set forth his doctrine of the daimones or 
ministers of the Gods, who are assigned to the lower hemisphere of operation, 
from the Earth to the Sun, the Gods presumably occupying the higher hemisphere 
of activity. These daimones are what a Hindu or Buddhist would call karmic agents, 
for they are all connected with what is called the Fate-Sphere, the Instrument or the 
Wheel of Genesis, or Samsara. 

1 5. These daimones rule over the lower energies of the soul; the higher energy or 
rational part of the soul is set above them, and is designed to be the “receptacle of 
God,” - or rather of His Ray, - the Mind proper. 

16. With § 16 compare the remarkable passage in one of the Letters of 
Valentinus: 


78 F. F. F, 549. 


- 181 - 



“One [alone] is Good, whose free utterance is His manifestation through His Son ; 
it is by Him alone that the heart can become pure, when every evil essence has been 
expelled from it. 

“Now its purity is prevented by the many essences which take up their abode in it, 
for each of them accomplishes its own deeds, outraging it in divers fashions with 
unseemly lusts. 

“As far as I can see, the heart seems to receive somewhat the same treatment as an 
inn [or caravanserai], which has holes and gaps made in its walls, and is frequently 
filled with dung men living filthily in it and taking no care of the place as being 
someone else’s property. Thus is it with the heart so long as it has no care taken of it, 
ever unclean and the abode of many daimons. 

“Tut when the Alone Good Father hath regard unto it, it is sanctified and shineth 
with light; and he who possesseth such a heart is so blessed that ‘he shall see God. 79 

The language of Valentinus is remarkably like that of our treatises; Valentinus 
himself was an Egyptian. 

17. Entirely Egyptian also is the Scheme of Dependency given in § 17, as we 
have already pointed out on several occasions, quoting from a Hymn of Valentinus. 

The sentence: “Wherefore God is the Sire of all; the Sun’s [their] Demiurge” - 
distinctly contradicts Reitzenstein’s (p. 198, 1) statement that the Sun in our treatise 
is worshipped as the All-god. The Sun is He “by whom all tilings are made,” - the 
Creative Logos of God 80 . 

19. The treatise is evidently incomplete; if, however, we turn to the contents-title 
given at the beginning of these comments we can gain but little information as to 
what is missing, for the contents there given do not in any but the vaguest fashion 
correspond to the substance of our treatise, nor do the subjects treated of come in 
the same order as in the contents-heading. The Divine Essence, Man, the Economy 
of the Pleroma and the Man after the Likeness, which are clearly not treated of in 
our text, may then have been treated in the missing portion of our tractate; but this 
is all we can say. 


79 Quoted by Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom., II. xx. 114; P. 489 (ed. Dindorf, ii. 219). See for further critical text, 
Hilgenfeld (A.), Ket^ergesch. d. Urchrist., p. 296; F. F. F., 300, 301. 

80 Cf. P. S. A., xxix. 5. 


- 182 - 



+- - » ' 

CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVII.) 

[OF AS CLEPIUS TO THE KING ] 

(T ext: R. 354; Pat. at end of last piece.) 


Asclepius. 



F thou dost think [of it], O King, even of bodies 
there are things bodiless 1 . 

The King. What [are they]? - (asked the King.) 


Asc. The bodies that appear in mirrors - do they not seem 
then to have no body? 

The King. It is so, O Asclepius 2 ; thou thinkest like a God 1 ! - 
(the King replied.) 


Asc. There are things bodiless as well as these; for instance, 
forms 4 5 - do not they seem to thee to have no body, but to 
appear in bodies not only of the things which are ensouled, 
but also of those which are not ensouled? 


The King. Thou sayest well, Asclepius. 

Asc. Thus, [then,] there are reflexions of things bodiless on 
bodies, and of bodies too upon things bodiless - that is to 
say, [reflexions] of the Sensible on the Intelligible World, and 
of the [World] Intelligible on the Sensible. 

Wherefore, pay worship to the images, O King, since they 
too have their forms as from the World Intelligible. 

(Thereon His Majesty arose and said:) 

The King. It is the hour 3 , O Prophet, to see about the comfort 
of our guests. To-morrow, [then,] will we resume our sacred 
converse 6 . 


1 Cf. Plat, Soph., 229 D, 240 A, 246 B. 

2 The corrector of B has changed the name Asclepius into Tat, as he has everywhere in C. H, ii. (iii.); R. 193, 1. 

3 0eiwQ. 

4 Or ideas. 

5 Cf. Plat, Soph., 241 B. 

6 6soi.oyfiaofji.sv. 


- 183 - 




COMMENTARY 

ON THE ADORATION OF IMAGES 

The loss of the end of the previous sermon, and also the loss of almost the 
whole of (xvii.), is to be accounted for by the falling out of one or more quires 
from the original MS. of our Corpus 7 , a phenomenon similar to that already 
remarked in the case of C. H., ii. (iii). 

And that this is the fact is brought out interestingly by the note of Reitzenstein 
(p. 193, 1) - namely, that one of the correctors of one of the copies (Paris MS.) of 
this faulty original has precisely in these two places changed the name Asclepius 
into Tat. He was puzzled, and thought that his “correction” would set matters 
right; as a matter of fact, however, it only adds to the confusion. 

What the main subject of our treatise may have been we can hardly conjecture; 
part of it, however, must have been devoted to an explanation of the rationale of 
image-adoration, - “Wherefore pay worship to the images, O King,” - of which we 
hear so much in P. S. -A. 

These symbolic images of the Gods are said to have their “forms” (Idsac) in 
sympathetic relation with the Intelligible World. These are mutual “reflections,” the 
one of the other. 

Now as the Ka of the God was thought to have immediate relation with the 
image-symbol of the God, and the Gods were of the Intelligible World, - the 
statues of the Gods were thought to be images of the Image in some special way; 
they were regarded as providing a straight path or line of connection between Earth 
and Heaven, just as a man who made himself like to the Man after the Likeness 
became in himself a Way Up. 


7 R. 198. 


- 184 - 



« 

CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVIII.) 

[THE ENCOMIUM OF KINGS] 

(ABOUT THE SOUL’S BEING HINDERED BY THE PASSION OF THE BODY) 

(T ext: R. 355-360; Pat. at end. ) 

1 . 

OW, in the case of those professing the 
harmonious art of muse-like melody - if, when 
the piece is played, the discord of the 
instruments doth hinder their intent, its rendering 
becomes ridiculous. 

For when his instruments are quite too weak for what’s 
required of them, the music-artist needs must be laughed 
at by the audience. 

For He, with all good will, gives of His art unweariedly; 
they blame the [artist’s] weakness. 

He then who is the Natural Musician-God, not only in 
His making of the harmony of His [celestial] songs, but 
also in His sending forth the rhythm of the melody of His 
own song[s] right down unto the separate instruments 1 , is, 
as God, never wearied. 

For that with God there is no growing weary. 

2. So, then, if ever a musician desires to enter into the 
highest contest of his art he can - when now the 
trumpeters have rendered the same phrase of the 
[composer’s] skill, and afterwards the flautists played the 
sweet notes of the melody upon their instruments 2 , and 
they complete the music of the piece with pipe and 



1 &xqi xcov xocxa fjisgo? OQyuvuv, - that is, to “parts” as opposed to “wholes”; “wholes” signifying generally noumenal 
or celestial essences, “parts” meaning the separate existences of the phenomenal or sensible world. 

2 agxi 8s xai oa>X?]xa>v xoiq pelaxot; xo x% pekcpSia? XiyoQOv EgY«oaftsvwv. - I do not know what this means exactly. 
Menard translates: quand les joueurs de flute ont exprime les finesses de la melodic, Patrizzi gives: melicis organis melodia 
dulcedinem. 


- 185 - 


plectrum - [if any thing goes wrong,] one 1 does not lay the 
blame upon the inspiration 3 4 5 of the music-maker. 

Nay, [by no means,] - to him one renders the respect that 
is his due; one blames the falseness of the instrument, in 
that it has become a hindrance to those who are most 
excellent - embarrassing the maker of the music in [the 
execution of] his melody, and robbing those who listen of 
the sweetness of the song. 

3. In like way also, in our case, let no one of our audience 
for the weakness that inheres in body, blame impiously 
our Race'. 

Nay, let him know God is Unwearied Spirit 6 - for ever in 
the self-same way possessed of His own science, 
unceasing in His joyous gifts, the self-same benefits 
bestowing everywhere. 

4. And if the Pheidias - the Demiurge - is not responded 
to, by lack of matter to perfect His skilfulness, although 
for His own part the Artist has done all he can, let us not 
lay the blame on Him. 

But let us, [rather,] blame the weakness of the string 7 , in 
that, because it is too slack or is too tight, it mars the 
rhythm of the harmony. 

5. So when it is that the mischance occurs by reason of 
the instrument, no one doth blame the Artist. 

Nay, [more;] the worse the instrument doth chance to be, 
the more the Artist gains in reputation by the frequency 
with which his hand doth strike the proper note 8 , and 
more the love the listeners pour upon that Music-maker, 
without 9 the slightest thought of blaming him. 


3 Or perhaps “he,” meaning the judge of the contest. 

4 XCG TtVSUftaTl. 

5 The Race of the Prophets, or Gnostics - the Race of the Logos. 

6 Referring to the “inspiration” or “breath” above, - cb? axapocxov psv Ecru Ttveupa 6 6so?. Compare John iv. 24: 
Ttvsupa 6 0so? - God is Spirit. 

7 The metaphor has become somewhat mixed by the introduction of Pheidias, who was a “musician” in marble and 
ivory and gold, and not on strings and pipes. 

8 liy KQobae wg noXKimq Jtgo? xov xovov Ejjwieaouar]?. 

9 Reading Eyovxeq for £ ay_ov. 


- 186 - 



So will we too, most noble [Sirs], set our own lyre in tune 
again, within, with the Musician! 

6. Nay, I have seen one of the artist- folk 10 - although he 
had no power of playing on the lyre - when once he had 
been trained for the right noble theme, make frequent use 
of his own self as instrument, and tune the service of his 
string by means of mysteries, so that the listeners were 
amazed at how he turned necessitude into magnificence 11 . 

Of course you know the story of the harper who won the 
favour of the God who is the president of music-work. 

[One day,] when he was playing for a prize, and when the 
breaking of a string became a hindrance to him in the 
contest, the favour of the Better One supplied him with 
another string, and placed within his grasp the boon of 
fame. 

A grasshopper was made to settle on his lyre, through the 
foreknowledge of the Better One, and [so] fill in the 
melody in substitution of the [broken] string 12 . 

And so by mending of his string the harper’s grief was 
stayed, and fame of victory was won. 

7. And this I feel is my own case, most noble [Sirs]! 

For but just now I seemed to make confession of my want 
of strength, and play the weakling for a little while; but 
now, by virtue of the strength of [that] Superior One, as 
though my song about the King had been perfected [by 
Him, I seem] to wake my muse. 

For, you must know, the end of [this] our duty will be the 
glorious fame of Kings, and the good-will of our 
discourse (logos) [will occupy itself] about the triumphs 
which they win. 

Come then, let us make haste! For that the singer willeth 
it, and hath attuned his lyre 1 ’ for this; nay more, more 


10 Meaning presumably prophets. 

11 It is difficult to follow the exact meaning of some of the writer’s rhetorical sentences, even if our text is sound; 
here, however, the text, even after passing through Reitzenstein’s hands, is still very halting, and so I venture on this 
translation with all hesitation. 

12 The song of the cicala was so pleasant to the ear of the Ancients, that we frequently find it used in poetry as a 
simile for sweet sounds. Plato calls the grasshoppers the “prophets of the Muses.” 


- 187 - 



sweetly will he play, more fitly will he sing, as he has for 
his song the greater subjects of his theme. 

8. Since, then, he 14 has the [stringing] of his lyre tuned 
specially to Kings, and has the key of laudatory songs, and 
as his goal the Royal praises, let him first raise himself 
unto the highest King - the God of wholes. 

Beginning, [then,] his song from the above, he, [thus,] in 
second place, descends to those after His likeness who 
hold the sceptre’s power 11 ; since Kings themselves, 
indeed, prefer the [topics] of the song should step by step 
descend from the above, and where they have their [gifts 
of] victory presided o’er for them, thence should their 
hopes be led in orderly succession. 

9. Let, then, the singer start with God, the greatest King 
of wholes, who is for ever free from death, both 
everlasting and possessed of [all] the might of 
everlastingness, the Glorious Victor, the very first, from 
whom all victories descend to those who in succession do 
succeed to victory 16 . 

10. Our sermon (logos) then, doth hasten to descend to 
[Kingly] praises and to the Presidents of common weal 
and peace, the Kings - whose lordship in most ancient 
times was placed upon the highest pinnacle by God 
Supreme; for whom the prizes have already been prepared 
even before their prowess in the war; of whom the 
trophies have been raised even before the shock of 
conflict. 

For whom it is appointed not only to be Kings but also to 
be best. 

At whom, before they even stir, the foreign land 1, doth 


13 For the idea of the prophet being the lyre of God, cf. Montanus (op. Epiphan., Har., xlviii. 4). See also the 
references to Philo given by R. 204, n. 1. 

14 Sc the singer. 

15 Cf. K. K, 39 ff. 

16 But see Plasberg’s reading. R. 370. 

17 to (3ag(3agov. 



- 188 - 



(ABOUT THE BLESSING OF THE BETTER [ONE] AND PRAISING OF THE 

KING) 


11. But now our theme (logos) doth hasten on to blend its 
end with its beginnings - with blessing of the Better 
[One] 18 ; and then to make a final end of its discourse 
{logos) on those divinest Kings who give us the [great] 
prize of peace. 

For just as we began [by treating] of the Better [One] and 
of the Power Above, so let us make the end bend round 
again unto the same - the Better [One]. 

Just as the Sun, the nurse of all the things that grow, on 
his first rising, gathers unto himself the first-fruits of their 
yield with his most mighty hands, using his rays as though 
it were for plucking off their fruits - yea, [for] his rays are 
[truly] hands for him who plucketh first the most 
ambrosial [essences] of plants - so, too, should we, 
beginning from the Better [One], and [thus] recipient of 
His wisdom’s stream, and turning it upon the garden of 
our souls above the heavens 19 , - we should [direct and] 
train these [streams] of blessing back again unto their 
source, [blessing] whose entire power of germination [in 
us] He hath Himself poured into us. 

12. ’Tis fit ten thousand tongues and voices should be 
used to send His blessings back again unto the all-pure 
God, who is the Father of our souls; and though we 
cannot utter what is fit - for we are [far] unequal to the 
task - [yet will we say what best we can]. 

For Babes just born have not the strength to sing their 
Father’s glory as it should be sung; but they give proper 
thanks for them, according to their strength, and meet 
with pardon for their feebleness 211 . 

Nay, it is rather that God’s glory doth consist in this [one] 
very thing - that He is greater than His children; and that 
the prelude and the source, the middle and the end, of 


18 too xgeixxovo?, - that is God, or the inner God, as in the last section. 

19 eig xa lpexega xcov <|iu3(® v UTisgougavia cpuxa. 


20 Lit. “in this.” 


- 189 - 



blessings, is to confess the Father to be infinitely puissant 
and never knowing what a limit means. 

13. So is it, too, in the King’s case. 

For that we men, as though we were the children of the 
King, feel it our natural duty to give praise to him. Still 
must we ask for pardon [for our insufficiency], e’en 
though ’tis granted by our Sire before we [even] ask. 

And as it cannot be the Sire will turn from Babes new- 
born because they are so weak, but rather will rejoice 
when they begin to recognise [his love] 21 - so also will the 
Gnosis of the all [rejoice], which doth distribute life to all, 
and power of giving blessing back to God, which Fie hath 
given [us]. 

14. For God, being Good, and having in Himself eternally 
the limit of His own eternal fitness, and being deathless, 
and containing in Himself that lot of that inheritance that 
cannot come unto an end, and [thus] for ever ever-flowing 
from out that energy of His, He doth send tidings to this 
world down here [to urge us] to the rendering of praise 
that brings us home again 22 . 

With Him 2 ’, therefore, is there no difference with one 
another; there is no partiality 24 with Him. 

But they are one in Thought. One is the Prescience 2 ’ of 
all. They have one Mind - their Father. 

One is the Sense that’s active through them - their passion 
for each other 26 . ’Tis Love 27 Himself who worketh the one 
harmony of all. 

15. Thus, therefore, let us sing the praise of God. 

Nay, rather, let us [first] descend to those who have 
received their sceptres from Him. 

21 Lit. “at their recognition,” - ETti ify Erayvwasw? - a play on epignosis and gnosis, and a parallel between the wisdom of 
God and the royal knowledge of the King. 

22 si? xov8s tov xdopov Tiagsywv if|v aTiayyslaav si? 8iaawcruxr|v sVKpt]fjilav, - where it may be possible to connect 
aTtayysXia with the familiar suayyslaov. 

23 Exsias. 

24 to aXkonQooaXkov. 

25 Tigoyvwai?. 

26 to si? aXXr(Koo<; tpiUgov. 

27 6 £gw?, - the Higher Love. 


- 190 - 



For that we ought to make beginning with our Kings, and 
so by practising ourselves on them, accustom us to songs 
of praise, and train ourselves in pious service to the Better 
[One]. 

[We ought] to make the very first beginnings of our 
exercise of praise begin from him 28 , and through him 
exercise the practice [of our praise], that so there may be 
in us both the exercising of our piety towards God, and of 
our praise to Kings. 

16. For that we ought to make return to them, in that they 
have extended the prosperity of such great peace to us. 

It is the virtue of the King, nay, ’tis his name alone, that 
doth establish peace. 

He has his name of King because he levelleth the summits 
of dissension with his smooth tread 29 , and is the lord of 
reason (logos) that [makes] for peace. 

And in as much, in sooth, as he hath made himself the 
natural protector of the kingdom which is not his native 
land 10 , his very name [is made] the sign of peace. 

For that, indeed, you know, the appellation of the King 
has frequently at once restrained the foe. 

Nay, more, the very statues of the King are peaceful 
harbours for those most tempest-tossed. 

The likeness of the King alone has to appear to win the 
victory, and to assure to all the citizens freedom from hurt 
and fear. 



28 Sc. the King. 

29 The word-play between (3aaitei><; and (3aosi Xsia is unreproducible in English. 

30 ify (3aaiXsia? xfjg (3ag(3agixfj<;. 


- 191 - 



COMMENTARY 


THE APOLOGY OF A PGEMANDRIST 

This, the last piece in our Corpus, differs so greatly both in style and form of 
contents from the rest of our sermons that we are plainly dealing with a different 
order of endeavour. 

The style is for the most part so very artificial and forced, that we are conscious 
of labour and effort, and sometimes of such obscurity as to make a clear rendering 
almost impossible. The contents are of the nature of an elaborate set Eulogy of 
Kings. 

Whether or not this concluding piece ever bore a proper title it is impossible to 
say, for the existing headings are plainly added by a later redactor ’ 1 , - as we have 
already seen in a number of other instances. I have therefore ventured to 
superscribe as the main title “The Encomium of Kings,”’ 2 and have placed the 
contents-headings in parentheses. 

Reitzenstein, in his analysis of the Corpus, concludes (p. 207) that this Eulogy 
was appended to the collection of treatises by the original redactor, or collector. 

He was an Egyptian Rhetor, who was a follower of the Trismegistic tradition, 
and his object in making the collection was mainly to show the Rulers of the 
Empire that not only was there nothing in the Hermes religion that could excite 
their suspicion, but that, on the contrary, it was in its most fundamental teachings 
admirably calculated to inculcate Loyalty to the Rulers of the Empire’s destinies. 

It is, indeed, to this “Apology,” so to speak, that we owe the good fortune of the 
preservation of our Corpus. 

SPECULATIONS AS TO DATE 

Who the “most noble [Sirs]” of §§ 5 and 7, to whom the Eulogy is immediately 
addressed, may be, is difficult to determine, for though the subject is the 
“Encomium of Kings” in general, some actual King was evidently in the mind of 
the writer when he penned § 16. Perhaps the “most noble” may have been the high 
officials of Egypt. 

The lost conclusion of our Encomium, for our actual text is evidently 
incomplete, may have given clearer indications of the Emperor for whose ultimate 
perusal the Eulogy was intended. As it is, the indications are of the vaguest. 

Reitzenstein, however, is of opinion (pp. 207, 208) that the indications in § 16 
best suit the reign of Diocletian {imp. 285-305 A.D.); but he is aware that, as far as 
these are concerned, an earlier date is not excluded (p. 208). It is only when he has 
treated, in his Addenda (pp. 371-374), the Encomium as an example of later Greek 
“art-prose,” or rhythmic prose, the scheme of the accentuation of which has been 
of late years carefully studied, especially by Meyer and Wilamowitz, that he comes 
definitely to the conclusion that the external form of our Rhetor’s effort fits 


31 In fact, are due to the first hand in B C D M. See R. 355, 1; 358, 12. 

32 See § 15 - f) kqoq tot)? (3aodsa? stHprifria - and compare note to Clem. Alex., iii., in “Fragments from the Fathers.” 


- 192 - 



precisely the time of Diocletian’s Triumph, 302 A.D. I cannot, however, say that I 
am convinced by his arguments. 

The strained and elaborate introduction (§§ 1-5) needs no further comment; no 
doubt it is very “fine writing,” but it is difficult to pin some of it down to any 
precise meaning in translation. 

THE STORY OF THE PYTHIC GRASSHOPPER 

6. With § 6, however, our interest is awakened, for it reminds us of the famous 
Introduction to the Protrepticus, or Exhortation to the Greeks , of Clement of 
Alexandria, when he says: 

“I could tell thee also of another - brother to these 3 J - story and singer, of Eunomus 
the Eocrian and the Pythic grasshopper. 

“AtPytho there was gathered together a solemn assembly of Greeks to celebrate the 
Death of the Serpent, with Eunomus to sing the funeral song of the beast. 

‘ Whether his song was a hymn or a dirge I cannot say; anyhow, there was a 
contest, and Eunomus had to harp it in the heat of the day, when the grasshoppers, 
warmed by the sun, were singing underneath the leaves along the hills. 

“They were singing not to the Serpent, the dead thing, but to God the All-wise, a 
song of unrestrained mode far better than the modes of Eunomus. 

“A cord breaks for the Eocrian; the grasshopper flies on to the yoke; it chirped on 
the harp as on a branch; and the minstrel, modulating to the song of the grasshopper, 
filled up the missing string. 

“It was not that the grasshopper was attracted by the song of Eunomus, as the 
story would have it, setting up a bragen statue at Pytho of Eunomus, harp and all, 
and his helper in the contest; it flew on naturally and sung naturally. The Greeks, 
however, thought it played the music. ” 34 

This passage shows that the story referred to by our author was well known, so 
well known indeed that Clement takes it as a text for a naturalistic explanation of 
Hellenic miracle. No literary dependence, however, of one or the other can be 
entertained, for the similarity of the “xfiv vsopav dvs7ikf]pooasv al)xG)” of our text 
and the “6 Cp86q xfiv Xeinouaav dvs7ikf]pooas yopSrjv” of Clement is far too slight a 
link to bear the weight of any argument of this nature ’ 5 . 

1 1. There is evidently a lacuna after § 10, and, judging by the opening words of § 
1 1 , it must be of some length, for the Praise of Kings so far is of a very brief 
description. 

It is also of interest to notice how much easier the style of our author is when he 
treats of the Praises of God; his words seem to come far more easily, as though he 
had a subject to deal with with which he was more familiar, as, indeed, he ought to 
have been if he had studied the treatises he has collected together. 


33 Amphion, Arion and Orpheus. 

34 Clem. Al., Prot., i. 1; P. 2 (ed. Dindorf, i. 2). 

35 Cf. R. 205, 206. 


- 193 - 



THE TRUE KING 


13. The idea that all his subjects are the children of the King is Egyptian; or, 
rather, it is the tradition of all nations who believed in Divine Kings. The true King 
was he who, so to speak, contained all his subjects within himself; they were all 
“members,” or, as we should say, cells, of Inis true Body. The nation was the King; 
the victory of the nation was ascribed to the virtue of the King 36 . 

THE FELLOW-RULERS OF THE HEIGHT 

14. The last three sentences of § 14 Reitzenstein (p. 208) would take as referring 
to the Kings under the suzerainty of the Emperor, who were bound to him by a 
common bond of love, in order that he may the more insist on the Diocletian 
date’ 7 . I would, however, refer the idea to the ideal of harmony and unity of the 
Beings of the Intelligible World, as described, for instance, by Plotinus, when he 
writes: 

“They see themselves in others. For all things are transparent, and there is nothing 
dark or resisting and everyone is manifest to everyone internally, and all things are 
made manifest; for light is manifest to light. For everyone has all things in himself 
and again sees in another all things, so that all things are everywhere, and all in all, 
and each in all, and infinite the glory. For each of them is great, since the small also is 
great. Find the sun there is all the stars, and, again, each and all are the sun. In each, 
one thing is pre-eminent above the rest, but it also shows forth all. ” 3S 

Compare this also with the intuition of the seer in The Untitled Apocalypse of the 
Codex Brucianus: 

‘Their Crowns send forth Kays; the Brilliancy of their Bodies is as the life of the 
Space into which they are come; the Word (Fogos) that comes out of their mouth is 
Eternal Fife, and the Fight that comes forth from their Eyes is Rest for them; the 
Movement of their Hands is their Flight to the Space out of which they are come, and 
their Gafing on their own Faces is Knowledge of themselves; their Giving to 
themselves is a repeated Return, and the Stretching out of their Hands establishes 
them; the Hearing of their Ears is the Perception in their Heart; and the Union of 
their Fimbs is the Ingathering of Israel; their Holding to one another is their 
Fortification in the Fogos. ” 39 

This is die Egyptian counterpart of the Plotinian Ecstasis; and Plotinus was by 
birth an Egyptian. 


36 This belief, indeed, is the power of the Japanese in our own day. 

37 He thus, apparently, would take the sxeiae as referring to these subject kings and rulers. 

38 En., V. viii. 4. 

39 F. F. F, 557. 


- 194 - 



II 

The Perfect Sermon 



- 195 - 




THE PERFECT SERMON 


OR THEASCLEPIUS 

(Text: The Greek original is lost, and only a Tatin version remains to us. I use the text of 
Hildebrand (G. F.J, L. Apuleii Opera Omnia ex Fide Optimorum Codicum (Leipzig 1842), 
Pars II., pp. 279-334; but have very occasionally preferred the text in Patriyyi’s Nova de 
Universis Philos ophia (Venice, 1593), or of the Bipontine edition of Appuleius, Tucii Apuleji 
Madaurensis Platonici Philosophi Opera (Biponti, 1788), pp. 285-325.) 


I 


l . 40 [I. M. 41 ] 

[Tris/negistus.\ 

OD, O Asclepius, hath brought thee unto us 
that thou mayest hear a Godly sermon 42 , a 
sermon such as well may seem of all the 
previous ones we’ve [either] uttered, or with which we’ve 
been inspired by the Divine, more Godly than the piety of 
[ordinary] faith. 

If thou with eye of intellect 4 ’ shalt see this Word 44 thou 
shalt in thy whole mind be filled quite full of all things 
good. 

If that, indeed, the “many” be the “good,” and not the 
“one,” in which are “all.” Indeed the difference between 
the two is found in their agreement, - “All” is of “One” 4 ’ 
or “One” is “All.” So closely bound is each to other, that 
neither can be parted from its mate. 

But this with diligent attention shalt thou learn from out 
the sermon that shall follow [this]. 

But do thou, O Asclepius, go forth a moment and call in 
the one who is to hear 46 . 



40 I have added numbers to the paragraphs for greater convenience of reference. 

41 Menard has divided the treatise into fifteen parts, which I have thus distinguished; the numbering of the chapters 
are those usually found. 

42 Or, a sermon about the Gods. 

43 Intelligens. 

44 Reason or sermon or logos-, cf. iii. and below: “For that the Reason,” etc. 

45 But ii. 1, referring again to this idea, has the reading: “‘All’ is ‘One.’” Cf. C. H., xvi. 3; and also xx. 2 below. 

46 This, as we shall see later on, is Tat. See xxxii. below. 


- 196 - 


(And when he had come in, Asclepius proposed that 
Ammon too should be allowed to come. Thereon Thrice- 
greatest said:) 

[Tot.] There is no cause why Ammon should be kept away 
from us. For we remember how we have ourselves set 
down in writing many things to his address 47 , as though 
unto a son most dear and most beloved, of physics many 
things, of ethics [too] as many as could be. 

It is, however, with thy name I will inscribe this treatise. 

But call, I prithee, no one else but Ammon, lest a most 
pious sermon on a so great theme be spoilt by the 
admission of the multitude. 

For ’tis the mark of an unpious mind to publish to the 
knowledge of the crowd a tractate brimming o’er with the 
full Greatness of Divinity. 

(When Ammon too had come within the holy place, and 
when the sacred group of four was now complete with 
piety and with God’s goodly presence - to them, sunk in 
fit silence reverently, their souls and minds pendent on 
Hermes’ lips, thus Love 48 Divine began to speak.) 

II 

1. [Tris.] The soul of every man, O [my] Asclepius, is 
deathless; yet not all in like fashion, but some in one way 
or [one] time, some in another. 

Asc. Is not, then, O Thrice-greatest one, each soul of one 
[and the same] quality? 

Tris. How quickly hast thou fallen, O Asclepius, from 
reason’s true sobriety! 

Did not I say that “All” is “One,” and “One” is “All,” in 
as much as all things have been in the Creator before they 
were created. Nor is He called unfitly “All,” in that His 
members are the “All.” 


47 Lit. to his name. 

48 Cnpido-, without doubt Eros in the lost original; tf. xxi. 1 below; and Frag, xviii. 


- 197 - 



Therefore, in all this argument, see that thou keep in mind 
Him who is “One”-“All,” or who Himself is maker of the 
“All” 

2. All things descend from Heaven to Earth, to Water and 
to Air. 

’Tis Fire alone, in that it is borne upwards, giveth life; that 
which [is carried] downwards [is] subservient to Fire. 

Further, whatever doth descend from the above, 
begetteth; what floweth upwards, nourisheth. 

’Tis Earth alone, in that it resteth on itself, that is Receiver 
of all things, and [also] the Restorer of all genera that it 
receives. 

This Whole 49 , therefore, as thou rememberest 01 ', in that it 
is of all, - in other words, all things, embraced by nature 
under “Soul” and “World,” ' 1 are in [perpetual] flux, so 
varied by the multiform equality of all their forms, that 
countless kinds of well-distinguished qualities may be 
discerned, yet with this bond of union, that all should 
seem as One, and from “One” “All”.' 52 

III 

1. That, then, from which the whole Cosmos is formed, 
consisteth of Four Elements - Fire, Water, Earth, and Air; 
Cosmos [itself is] one, [its] Soul [is] one, and God is one. 

Now lend to me the whole of thee 00 , - all that thou can’st 
in mind, all that thou skill’st in penetration. 

For that the Reason 04 of Divinity may not be known 
except by an intention of the senses like to it 55 . 

’Tis 56 likest to the torrent’s flood, down-dashing headlong 
from above with all-devouring tide; so that it comes 


49 This, as we have already noted, is a variant of the reading in i., where we find “ omnia twins esse ’ (“all” is of “one”) 
and not “ omnia mum esse” (“all” is “one”). 

50 Presumably from some previous sermon. 

51 Sc. the Cosmos. 

52 The Latin of this paragraph is very obscure. 

53 Cf. C. H., xi. (xii.) 15: “Give thou thyself to Me, My Hermes, for a little while.” 

54 Ratio — that is, Logos. 

55 Lit. divine — that is, by a concentration like to the singleness of the Godhead. 

56 That is, “This Reason is.” 


- 198 - 



about, that by the swiftness of its speed it is too quick for 
our attention, not only for the hearers, but also for the 
very teachers ' 7 . 

2. [11. M.] Heaven, then, God Sensible, is the director of 
all bodies; bodies’ increasings and decreasings are ruled by 
Sun and Moon. 

But He who is the Ruler of the Heaven, and of its Soul as 
well, and of all things within the Cosmos, - He is God, 
who is the Maker of all things. 

For from all those that have been said above' 8 , o’er which 
the same God rules, there floweth forth a flood of all 
things streaming through the Cosmos and the Soul, of 
every class and kind, throughout the Nature of [all] things. 

The Cosmos hath, moreover, been prepared by God as 
the receptacle of forms of every kind ' 9 . 

Forth- thinking Nature by these kinds of things, He hath 
extended Cosmos unto Heaven by means of the Four 
Elements, - all to give pleasure to the eye of God. 

IV 

1. And all dependent from Above 611 are subdivided into 
species in the fashion 61 which I am to tell. 

The genera of all things company with their own species; 
so that the genus is a class in its entirety, the species is part 
of a genus. 

The genus of the Gods will, therefore, make the species of 
the Gods out of itself. 


57 “Quo efficitnr nt intentionem nostrum . . . celeri velocitate praetereat.” Compare with this the description of the instruction 
of the Therapeuts in Philo’s famous tractate, De Vita Contenrplativa, 901 P., 483 M. — Conybeare’s text, p. 117 
(Oxford; 1895): “For when in giving an interpretation, one continues to speak rapidly without pausing for breath, the 
mind of the hearers is left behind, unable to keep up the pace” — 6 xcov axpowpevwv vou? auvopapxetv aSuvxciiv 

UCTTSgi^Sl. 

58 This seems to refer to the Elements. 

59 Omniformium speciertim. 

60 Omnia autem destper pendentia. Compare with this the famous Psalm of Valentius, “All things depending from Spirit I 
see” — Tiavxa xpepapeva xveupaxi (3 Xstiw — H ippolytus, Philos., vi. 37. For revised text see Hilgenfeld’s (A.) 
Ket^ergeschichte, p. 304 (Leipzig, 1884), and for a translation, my Fragments of a Faith Forgotten, p. 307 (London; 1900). 
See also end of xix. 4 below, and C. H., xvi. 17. 

61 Genere. 


- 199 - 



In like way, too, the genus of the daimons, and of men, 
likewise of birds, and of all [animals] the Cosmos doth 
contain within itself, brings into being species like itself. 

There is besides a genus other than the animal, - a genus, 
or indeed a soul, in that it’s not without sensation, - in 
consequence of which it both finds happiness in suitable 
conditions, and pines and spoils in adverse ones; - I mean 
[the class] of all things on the earth which owe their life to 
the sound state of roots and shoots, of which the various 
kinds are scattered through the length and breadth of 
Earth. 

2. The Heaven itself is full of God. The genera we have 
just mentioned, therefore, occupy up to the spaces of all 
things whose species are immortal. 

For that a species is part of a genus, - as man, for instance, 
of mankind, - and that a part must follow its own class’s 
quality. 

From which it comes to pass that though all genera are 
deathless, all species are not so. 

The genus of Divinity is in itself and in its species 62 [also] 
deathless. 

As for the genera of other things, - as to their genus, they 
[too] are everlasting; [for] though [the genus] perish in its 
species, yet it persists through its fecundity in being born. 
And for this cause its species are beneath the sway of 
death; so that man mortal is, mankind immortal. 

V 

1. And yet the species of all genera are interblended with 
all genera; some 6 ’ which have previously been made, some 
which are made from these. 

The latter, then, which are being made, - either by Gods, 
or daimons, or by men, - are species all most closely like 
to their own several genera. 


62 That is, the Gods. 

63 Sc. species. 


- 200 - 



For that it is impossible that bodies should be formed 
without the will of God; or species be configured without 
the help of daimons; or animals be taught and trained 
without the help of men 64 . 

2. Whoever of the daimons, then, transcending their own 
genus, are, by chance, united with a species 63 , by reason of 
the neighbourhood of any species of the Godlike class, - 
these are considered like to Gods 66 . 

Whereas those species of the daimons which continue in 
the quality of their own class, - these love men’s rational 
nature [and occupy themselves with men], and are called 
daimons proper. 

Likewise is it the case with men, or more so even. Diverse 
and multiform, the species of mankind. And coming in 
itself from the association spoken of above, it of necessity 
doth bring about a multitude of combinations of all other 
species and almost of all things. 

3. Wherefore doth man draw nigh unto the Gods, if he 
have joined himself unto the Gods with Godlike piety by 
reason of his mind, whereby he is joined to the Gods; and 
[nigh] unto the daimons, in that he is joined unto them [as 
well] . 

Whereas those men who are contented with the 
mediocrity of their own class, and the remaining species 
of mankind, will be like those unto the species of whose 
class they’ve joined themselves 67 . 

VI 

1. [III. M.] It is for reasons such as these, Asclepius, man 
is a mighty wonder, - an animal meet for our worship and 
for our respect. 

For he doth pass into God’s Nature 68 , as though himself 
were God. This genus [also] knows the genus of the 


64 Cf. C. H., xvi. 18, for the hierarchy of Gods and daimones; and for the “intercourse of souls,” C. H., x. (xi.) 22. 

65 That is, one of the immortal species, or a God. 

66 That is, they become Gods. 

67 A suggestion of man’s attraction to the various species of the animal nature. 

68 This contradicts somewhat the more careful wording of C. H., x. (xi.) 1, where the term Energy is preferred. 


-201 - 



daimons, as though man knew he had a [common] origin 
with them. He thinketh little of the part of human nature 
in him, from confidence in the divineness of [his] other 
part. 

How much more happy is the blend of human nature 
[than of all the rest]! Joined to the Gods by his cognate 
divinity, a man looks down upon the part of him by 
means of which he’s common with the Earth. 

The rest of things to which he knows he’s kin, by [reason 
of] the heavenly order [in him], he binds unto himself 
with bonds of love; and thus he turns his gaze to Heaven. 

2. So, then, [man] hath his place in the more blessed 
station of the Midst; so that he loves [all] those below 
himself, and in his turn is loved by those above. 

He tills the Earth. He mingles with the Elements by 
reason of the swiftness of his mind. He plunges into the 
Sea’s depths by means of its 69 profundity. He puts his 
values on all things. 

Heaven seems not too high for him; for it is measured by 
the wisdom of his mind as though it were quite near. 

No darkness of the Air obstructs the penetration of his 
mind. No density of Earth impedes his work. No depth of 
Water blunts his sight 70 . 

[Though still] the same [yet] is he all, and everywhere is he 
the same. 

3. Of all these genera, those [species] which are animal 
have [many] roots, which stretch from the above below 71 , 
whereas those which are stationary 72 - these from [one] 
living root send forth a wood of branching greenery up 
from below into the upper parts. 


69 Sc. the mind’s. 

70 Cf.C.H., xi. (xii.) 19. 

71 Compare with this the symbolism of the “fire-tree” and the “rootage” of the aeons, in the “Simonian” system of 
the Gnosis, taken by Hippolytus from the document entitled The Great Announcement (Hipp., Philos., vi. 9 and 18). 
Also the common figure of the Ashvattha tree of Indo-Aryan mythology; for instance, in the Kathopanishad, II. vi. 1: 
“The old, old tree that sees no morrow’s dawn, [stands] roots up, branches down” (see Mead and Chattopadhyaya’s 
Upanishads, i. 74 — London; 1896). Ashvatthah = a-shvah-tha, that is, “which stands not till to-morrow.” The idea is 
that the world-tree ( samsaravriksha ) never lasts till to-morrow, for all things are perpetually changing. 

72 Lit. non-animal. 


- 202 - 



Moreover, some of them are nourished with a two-fold 
form of food, while others with a single form. 

Twain are the forms of food - for soul and body, of which 
[all] animals consist. Their soul is nourished by the ever- 
restless motion of the World 7 ’; their bodies have their 
growth from foods [drawn] from the water and the earth 
of the inferior world' 4 . 

Spirit 7 ’, with which they 76 all are filled, being interblended 
with the rest 77 , doth make them live; sense being added, 
and also reason in the case of man - which hath been 
given to man alone as a fifth part out of the asther. 

Of all the living things 78 [God] doth adorn, extend, exalt, 
the sense of man alone unto the understanding of the 
Reason of Divinity 79 . 

But since I am impressed to speak concerning Sense, I will 
a little further on set forth for you the sermon on this 
[point]; for that it is most holy, and [most] mighty, not less 
than in the Reason of Divinity itself. 

VII 

1. But now I’ll finish for you what I have begun. For I was 
speaking at the start of union with the Gods, by which 
men only 8 " consciously enjoy 81 the Gods’ regard, - I mean 
whatever men have won such rapture that they have 
obtained a share of that Divine Sense of intelligence 
which is the most 82 Divine of Senses, found in God and in 
man’s reason. 

Asc. Are not the senses of all men, Thrice-greatest one, 
the same? 


73 Or Cosmos. 

74 Cf. xi. 2. 

75 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 13, and Commentary thereon. 

76 That is, animal bodies. 

77 Presumably the rest of the Earth elements. 

78 Lit. animals. 

79 Lit. the Divine Reason, Ratio, or Logos. 

80 Sc. of the animals. Cf. xviii. 1 below. 

si Perfruuntur. Cf, for the idea, xxii. 1 below. 

82 Lit. more. 


- 203 - 



Tris. Nay, [my] Asclepius, all have not won true reason 81 ; 
but wildly rushing in pursuit of [reason’s] counterfeit 84 , 
they never see the thing itself, and are deceived. And this 
breeds evil in their minds, and [thus] transforms the best 
of animals into the nature of a beast and manners of the 
brutes. 

2. But as to Sense and all things similar, I will set forth the 
whole discourse when [I explain] concerning Spirit. 

For man is the sole animal that is twofold. One part of 
him is simple: the [man] “essential,” 8 ' as say the Greeks, 
but which we call the “form of the Divine Similitude.” 

He also is fourfold: that which the Greeks call “hylic,” 86 
[but] which we call “cosmic”; of which is made the 
corporal part, in which is vestured what we just have said 
is the divine in man 87 , - in which the godhead of the Mind 
alone, together with its kin, that is the Pure Mind’s senses, 
findeth home and rest, its self with its own self, as though 
shut in the body’s walls. 

3. [IV. M.] Asc. What, then, Thrice-greatest one, has 
caused it that man should be planted in the world, and 
should not pass his life in highest happiness in that part 
[of the universe] where there is God? 

[Tris.] Rightly thou questionest, O [my] Asclepius! And we 
pray God that He bestow on us the power of setting forth 
this reason; since everything depends upon His Will, and 
specially those things that are set forth about the Highest 
Whole, the Reason that’s the object of our present 
argument. Hear, then, Asclepius! 

VIII 

1. The Lord and Maker of all things, whom we call rightly 
God, when from Himself He made the second [God], the 
Visible and Sensible 88 , - I call him Sensible not that He 


83 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 23, 24; iv. (v.) 3; and ix. 3 below. 

84 Lit. image. 

85 The Greek term ouaicbS?]? is here retained. Cf. viii. 2 below. 

86 The Greek iiXixdv being retained in the Latin. 

87 Cf.C.H., xvi. 15. 

88 Sc. the Logos as Cosmos. Cf. xxxi. 1 below. 


- 204 - 



hath sensation in Himself (for as to this, whether or no 
He have himself sensation, we will some other time 
declare), but that He is the object of the senses of those 
who see; - when, then, He made Him first, but second to 
Himself, and that He seemed to Him [most] fair, as one 
filled to the full with goodness of all things, He fell in love 
with Him as being part of His Divinity 89 . 

2. Accordingly, in that He was so mighty and so fair, He 
willed that some one else should have the power to 
contemplate the One He had made from Himself. And 
thereon He made man, - the imitator of His Reason and 
His Love 90 . 

The Will of God is in itself complete accomplishment; 
inasmuch as together with His having willed, in one and 
the same time He hath brought it to full accomplishment. 

And so, when He perceived that the “essential” 91 [man] 
could not be lover 92 of all things, unless He clothed him in 
a cosmic carapace, He shut him in within a house of body, 
- and ordered it that all [men] should be so, - from either 
nature making him a single blend and fair-proportioned 
mixture. 

3. Therefore hath He made man of soul and body, - that 
is, of an eternal and a mortal nature; so that an animal 
thus blended can content his dual origin, - admire and 
worship things in heaven, and cultivate and govern things 
on earth 9 '. 

By mortal things 94 I do not mean the water or the earth 
[themselves], for these are two of the [immortal] elements 


89 The Greek original of this passage is quoted by Lactantius, Dip. Institt., iv. 6, and runs as follows in Fritzsche’s (O. 
F.) text (Leipzig, 1842): “The Lord and Maker of all things (whom ’tis our custom to call God) when He had made 
the second God, the Visible and Sensible, — I call him Sensible not that He hath sensation in Himself (for as to this, 
whether or no He have himself sensation, we will some other time enquire), but that He is object of senses and of 
mind; — when, then, He’d made Him first, and One and Only, He seemed to Him most fair, and filled quite full of all 
things good. At Him He marvelled, and loved Him altogether as His Son.” With the last words, cf. Plat., Tim., 37 D. 

90 Diligentia. 

91 The Greek ofioicbSt]? being again, as in vii. 2, retained in the Latin. Cf. C. H., i. 15 and ix. (x.) 5. 

92 Diligentem. 

93 This sentence is also quoted by Lactantius (Dip. Institt., vii. 13) in the original Greek, which reads: “From the two 
natures, the deathless and the mortal, He made one nature, — that of man, one and the selfsame thing. And having 
made the selfsame [man] both somehow deathless and also somehow mortal, He brought him [forth], and set him up 
betwixt the godlike and immortal nature and the mortal; that seeing all he might wonder at all.” 

94 That is, the “things on earth.” 


- 205 - 



that nature hath made subject unto men, - but [either] 
things that are by men, or [that are] in or from them 9 '; 
such as the cultivation of the earth itself, pastures, [and] 
buildings, harbours, voyagings, intercommunications, 
mutual services, which are the firmest bonds of men 
between themselves and that part of the Cosmos which 
consists [indeed] of water and of earth, [but is] the 
Cosmos’ terrene part, - which is preserved by knowledge 
and the use of arts and sciences; without which [things] 
God willeth not Cosmos should be complete 96 . 

In that necessity doth follow what seems good to God; 
performance waits upon His will. 

Nor is it credible that that which once hath pleased Him, 
will become unpleasing unto God; since He hath known 
both what will be, and what will please Him, long before. 

IX 

1. [V. M.] But, O Asclepius, I see that thou with swift 
desire of mind art in a hurry to be told how man can have 
a love and worship of the Heaven, or of the things that 
are therein. Hear, then, Asclepius! 

The love of God and Heaven, together with all them that 
are therein, is one perpetual act of worship 97 . 

No other thing ensouled, of Gods or animals, can do this 
thing, save man alone 98 . ’Tis in the admiration, adoration, 
[and] the praise of men, and [in their] acts of worship, that 
Heaven and Heaven’s hosts find their delight. 

2. Nor is it without cause the Muses’ choir hath been sent 
down by Highest Deity unto the host of men; in order 
that, forsooth, the terrene world should not seem too 
uncultured, had it lacked the charm of measures, but 
rather that with songs and praise of men accompanied 
with music 99 , He might be lauded, - He who alone is all, or 


95 That is, the two elements mentioned. 

96 The above paragraph seems to have been very imperfectly translated into Latin. 

97 Una est obseqnioruni freqnentatio. Cf. Ex. i. 3. 

98 Cf. C. H., xvi. 11: “The duty of mankind is to give worship.” 

99 Mnsicatis ; or perhaps “Muse-inspired”; a word which, like so many others, occurs only in the Latin of this treatise. 


- 206 - 



is the Sire of all; and so not even on the earths 100 , should 
there have been an absence of the sweetness of the 
harmony of heavenly praise. 

3. Some, then, though they be very few, endowed with the 
Pure Mind 101 , have been entrusted with the sacred charge 
of contemplating Heaven. 

Whereas those men who, from the two-fold blending of 
their nature, have not as yet withdrawn their inner reason 
from their body’s mass 1 " 2 , these are appointed for the 
study of the elements, and [all] that is below them. 

4. Thus man’s an animal; yet not indeed less potent in that 
he’s partly mortal, but rather doth he seem to be all the 
more fit and efficacious for reaching Certain Reason, since 
he has had mortality bestowed on him as well. 

For it is plain he could not have sustained the strain of 
both, unless he had been formed out of both natures 10 ’, so 
that he could possess the powers of cultivating Earthly 
things and loving Heaven. 

X 

1. The Reason of a thesis such as this, O [my] Asclepius, I 
would that thou should’st grasp, not only with the keen 
attention of thy soul, but also with its living power 104 [as 
well]. 

For ’tis a Reason that most men cannot believe; the 
Perfect and the True are to be grasped by the more holy 
minds 10 ’. Hence, then, will I begin. 

2. [VI. M.] The Lord of the Eternity 106 is the first God; the 
second’s Cosmos; man is the third 107 . 


100 In terns , pi. 

101 Cf. vii. 1 and 2 above. 

102 The reading is “interiorem intelligentiam mole corporis resederuntf of which I can make nothing; resedemnt is evidently an 
error. 

103 There is here a “double” in the text, which the editor has not removed. 

104 Vivacitate. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 17; and xix. 1 below. 

105 Cf. C. H, ix. (x.) 10. 

106 That is, the iEon. Cf. xxx. 1 below. 

107 Cf. Ex. i. 8. 


-207 - 



God is the Maker of the Cosmos and of all the things 
therein; at the same time He ruleth 108 all, with man 
himself, [who is] the ruler of the compound thing 1119 ; the 
whole of which man taking on himself, doth make of it 
the proper care of his own love, in order that the two of 
them, himself and Cosmos, may be an ornament each 
unto other; so that from this divine compost of man, 
“World” seems most fitly called “Cosmos” 11 " in Greek. 

3. He knows himself; he knows the World as well 111 . So 
that he recollects, indeed, what is convenient to his own 
parts. He calls to mind what he must use, that they may be 
of service to himself; giving the greatest praise and thanks 
to God, His Image 112 reverencing, - not ignorant that he 
is, too, God’s image the second [one]; for that there are 
two images of God - Cosmos and man 11 ’. 

4. So that it comes to pass that, since man’s is a single 
structure, - in that part [of him] which doth consist of 
Soul, and Sense, of Spirit, and of Reason, he’s divine; so 
that he seems to have the power to mount from as it were 
the higher elements into the Heaven. 

But in his cosmic part, which is composed of fire, and 
water, and of air, he stayeth mortal on the Earth, - lest he 
should leave all things committed to his care forsaken and 
bereft. 

Thus human kind is made in one part deathless, and in the 
other part subject to death while in a body. 

XI 

1. Now of that dual nature, - that is to say of man, - there 
is a chief capacity. [And that is] piety, which goodness 
follows after. 


108 Reading gubernat for gubemando. 

109 That is, the compost, or “cosmic” part of himself, apparently, of v. 2. 

11,1 The original Greek Koopog is here retained in the Latin; it means “order, adornment, ornament,” as well as 
“world.” 

111 The idea is that man is a microcosm; he is, as to his bodies, “cosmic” (“ mundanus homrf"), for his vehicles are made 
of the elements; he is thus in these an image or seed (microcosm) of the universe, the macrocosm. 

112 Sc. Cosmos. Cf. xxxi. 1 below. 

113 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 25, last sentence. 


- 208 - 



[And] this [capacity] then, and then only, seems to be 
perfected, if it be fortified with virtue of despising all 
desires for alien things. 

For alien from every part of kinship with the Gods 114 are 
all things on the Earth, whatever are possessed from 
bodily desires, - to which we rightly give the name 
“possessions,” in that they are not born with us, but later 
on begin to be possessed by us; wherefore we call them by 
the name possessions 113 . 

2. All such things, then, are alien from man, - even his 
body. So that we can despise not only what we long for, 
but also that from which the vice of longing comes to us. 

For just as far as the increase of reason leads our 116 soul, 
so far one should be man; in order that by contemplating 
the divine, one should look down upon, and disregard the 
mortal part, which hath been joined to him, through the 
necessity of helping on the lower 11, world. 

3. For that, in order that a man should be complete in 
either part, observe that he hath been composed of 
elements of either part in sets of four; - with hands, and 
feet, both of them pairs, and with the other 118 members of 
his body, by means of which he may do service to the 
lower (that is to say the terrene) world. 

And to these parts [are added other] four; - of sense, and 
soul, of memory, and foresight, by means of which he 
may become acquainted with the rest of things divine, and 
judge of them. 

Hence it is brought about that man investigates the 
differences and qualities, effects and quantities of things, 
with critical research; yet, as he is held back with the too 
heavy weight of body’s imperfection, he cannot properly 


114 Ab omnibus divince cognationis partibus. 

115 This seems somewhat tautological. The first clause runs: “quacunque terrena corporali apiditate possidentur; qua merito 
possessionem nomine nunatpantnr.” This Latin word-play seems almost to suggest that we are dealing with an 
embellishment of the translator; it may, however, have stood in the original. Cf. xii. 2 below. 

116 Lit. my. 

117 Reading inferioris for interioris, as immediately below in § 3. Cf. vi. 3, last sentence. 

118 This seems very loose indeed; the text or the Latin translation is probably at fault, unless the “other members” are 
supposed to be grouped in sets of double pairs. 


- 209 - 



descry the causes of the nature of [all] things which [really] 
are the true ones. 

4. Man, then, being thus created and composed, and to 
such ministry and service set by Highest God, - man, by 
his keeping suitably the world in proper order, [and] by his 
piously adoring God, in both becomingly and suitably 
obeying God’s Good Will, - [man being] such as this, with 
what reward think’st thou he should be recompensed? 

If that, indeed, - since Cosmos is God’s work, - he who 
preserves and adds on to its beauty by his love, joins his 
own work unto God’s Will; when he with toil and care 
doth fashion out the species 119 (which He hath made 
[already] with His Divine Intent), with help of his own 
body; - with what reward think’st thou he should be 
recompensed, unless it be with that with which our 
forebears 1211 have been blest? 

5. That this may be the pleasure of God’s Love, such is 
our prayer for you, devoted ones. 

In other words, may He, when ye have served your time, 
and have put off the world’s restraint, and freed 
yourselves from deathly bonds, restore you pure and holy 
to the nature of your higher self 121 , that is of the Divine! 

XII 

1. Asc. Righdy and truly, O Thrice-greatest one, thou 
speakest. This is the prize for those who piously 
subordinate their lives to God and live to help the world. 

Tris. [To those], however, who have lived in other fashion 
impiously, - [to them] both is return to Heaven denied, 
and there’s appointed them migration into other bodies 122 
unworthy of a holy soul and base; so that, as this 
discourse of ours will show 12 ’, souls in their life on earth 
run risk of losing hope of future immortality. 


119 Singular — that is, the species in the Cosmos, according to the type in the Divine Mind. 

120 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 5; Lact., D. I., i. 11; and xxxvii. 3 below. 

121 Lit. part. 

122 hi corporalia . . . migratio. 

123 The Latin here does not construe. 


- 210 - 



2. But [all of this] doth seem to some beyond belief; a tale 
to others; to others [yet again], perchance, a subject for 
their mirth 124 . 

For in this life in body, it is a pleasant thing - the pleasure 
that one gets from one’s possessions 12 '. Tis for this cause 
that spite, in envy of its [hope of] immortality, doth clap 
the soul in prison 126 , as they say, and keep it down, so that 
it stays in that part of itself in which it’s mortal, nor 
suffers it to know the part of its divinity. 

3. For I will tell thee, as though it were prophetic-ly 127 , 
that no one after us 128 shall have the Single Love, the Love 
of wisdom-loving 129 , which consists in Gnosis of Divinity 
alone, - [the practice of] perpetual contemplation and of 
holy piety. For that the many do confound philosophy 
with multifarious reasoning 1 ’ 11 . 

Asc. Why is it, then, the many make philosophy so hard to 
grasp; or wherefore is it they confound this thing with 
multifarious reasoning? 

XIII 

1. Tris. ’Tis in this way, Asclepius; - by mixing it, by means 
of subtle expositions, with divers sciences not easy to be 
grasped, - such as arithmetic, and music, and geometry. 

But Pure Philosophy, which doth depend on godly piety 
alone, should only so far occupy itself with other arts, that 
it may [know how to] appreciate the working out in 
numbers of the fore-appointed stations of the stars when 
they return, and of the course of their procession. 

Let her, moreover, know how to appreciate the Earth’s 
dimensions, its qualities and quantities, the Water’s 


124 Cf. C. H., i. 29; also xxv. 3 below. 

125 Cf. xi. 1 above. 

126 Obtorto . . . collo. 

127 Ego enim tibi quasi pradivinans dixero. Notice the dixero, — the “prophetic” tense, if we may be permitted to coin a 
term to characterize this use, which reminds us so strongly of the “Sibylline” literature and the allied prophetic 
centonism of the time. 

128 Cf. Ex. ix. 8, and xiv. 1 below. 

129 Lit. philosophy. Cf. in Philo, D. IV C, the “Heavenly Love” with which the Therapeuts were “afire with God.” Cf. 
xiv. 1, and Ex. i. 3. 

130 Cf. C. H, xvi. 2. 


-211 - 



depths, the strength of Fire, and the effects and nature of 
all these. [And so] let her give worship and give praise 
unto the Art and Mind of God. 

2. As for [true] Music, - to know this is naught else than to 
have knowledge of the order of all things, and whatsoe’er 
God’s Reason hath decreed. 

For that the order of each several thing when set together 
in one [key] for all, by means of skilful reason, will make, 
as ’twere, the sweetest and the truest harmony with God’s 
[own] Song 1 ’ 1 . 

XIV 

1. Asc. Who, therefore, will the men be after us? 1 ’ 2 

Tris. They will be led astray by sophists’ cleverness, and 
turned from True Philosophy, - the Pure and Floly [Love]. 

For that to worship God with single mind and soul, and 
reverence the things that He hath made, and to give 
thanks unto His Will, which is the only thing quite full of 
Good, - this is Philosophy unsullied by the soul’s rough 
curiousness. 

But of this subject let what has been said so far suffice. 

2. [VII. M.] And now let us begin to treat of Spirit and 
such things. 

There was first God and Matter 1 ’’, which we in Greek 1 ’ 4 
believe [to be] the Cosmos; and Spirit was with Cosmos, or 
Spirit was in Cosmos, but not in like way as in God 1 ”; nor 
were there things [as yet] from which the Cosmos [comes 
to birth] in God. 

They were not; just for the very reason that they were not, 
but were as yet in that [condition] whence they have had 
their birth 1 ’ 6 . 


131 Cf. “Heaven’s harmonious song” in xxviii. 1 1 below. 

132 Cf. xii. 3 above, and notes. 

133 The Greek 13X7] is here retained by the translator. 

134 Grace. 

135 The Latin translation is confused. The original seems to have stated that Spirit and Cosmos (or Matter) were as 
yet one, or Spirit-Matter. 

136 That is, presumably, they were in potentiality. 


- 212 - 



For those things only are not called ingenerable which 
have not yet been born, but [also] those which lack the 
fertilizing power of generating, so that from them naught 
can be born. 

And so whatever things there are that have in them the 
power of generating, - these two are generable, [that is to 
say,] from which birth can take place, though they be born 
from their own selves [alone]. For there’s no question that 
from those born from themselves birth can with ease take 
place, since from them all are born. 

3. God, then, the everlasting, God the eternal, nor can be 
born, nor could Fie have been born. That 1 ’' is, That was, 
That shall be ever. This, therefore, is God’s Nature - all 
from itself [alone]. 

But Matter 1 ’ 8 (or the Nature of the Cosmos) 1 ’ 9 and Spirit, 
although they do not seem to be things born from any 
source 140 , yet in themselves possess the power of 
generation and of generating, - the nature of fecundity. 

For the beginning 141 [truly] is in [just that] quality of nature 
which possesses in itself the power and matter both of 
conception and of birth . This , then, without concep- 
tion of another, is generable of its own self. 

XV 

1. But, on the other hand, [whereas] those things which 
only have the power of bringing forth by blending with 
another nature, are thus to be distinguished, this Space of 
Cosmos 144 , with those that are in it, seems not to have 
been born, in that [the Cosmos] has in it undoubtedly all 
Nature’s potency 143 . 


137 Hoc. 

138 Again 15Xr] in the Latin text. 

139 Cf. “Matter or Cosmos” of xvii. 2. 

140 Principio, “beginning” the same word as that used in the Vulgate translation of the Proem of the fourth Gospel. 

141 Initium. 

142 This seems to make it clear that the idea “Cosmos” is regarded under the dual concept of Spirit-Matter. 

143 Sc. Primal Nature, or Spirit-Matter. 

144 Cf. xxx. 1, and xxxiv. 1 below. 

145 The Latin construction is very faulty. 


- 213 - 



By “Space” I mean that in which are all things. For all 
these things could not have been had Space not been, to 
hold them all. Since for all things that there have been, 
must be provided Space. 

For neither could the qualities nor quantities, nor the 
positions, nor [yet] the operations, be distinguished of 
those things which are no where. 

2. So then the Cosmos, also, though not born, still has in 
it the births 146 of all; in that, indeed, it doth afford for all 
of them most fecund wombs for their conception. 

It, therefore, is the sum of [all that] quality of Matter 
which hath creative potency, although it hath not been 
[itself] created. 

And, seeing that [this] quality of Matter is in its nature 
[simple] productiveness; so the same [source] produces 
bad as well [as good]. 

XVI 

1. I have not, therefore, O Asclepius and Ammon, said 
what many say, that God could not excise and banish evil 
from the Scheme 147 of Things; - to whom no answer need 
at all be given. Yet for your sakes I will continue what I 
have begun, and give a reason. 

They say that God ought to have freed the World from 
bad in every way; for so much is it 148 in the World, that it 
doth seem to be as though it were one of its limbs. 

This was foreseen by Highest God and [due] provision 
made, as much as ever could have been in reason made, 
then when He thought it proper to endow the minds of 
men with sense 149 , and science and intelligence. 

2. For it is by these things alone whereby we stand above 
the rest of animals, that we are able to avoid the snares 
and crimes of ill. 


146 Natnras. 

147 Lit. nature. 

148 Sc. evil or bad. 

149 Presumably meaning the higher sense. 


- 214 - 



For he who shall on sight have turned from them, before 
he hath become immeshed 1 '" in them, - he is a man 
protected by divine intelligence and [godly] prudence. 

For that the ground-work of [true] science doth consist of 
the top-stones of virtue. 

3. It is by Spirit that all things are governed in the 
Cosmos, and made quick, - Spirit made subject to the Will 
of Highest God, as though it were an engine or machine. 

So far, then, [only] let Him be by us conceived, - as Him 
who is conceivable by mind alone, who is called Highest 
God, the Ruler and Director of God Sensible 151 , - of Him 
who in Himself includes all Space, all Substance, and all 
Matter, of things producing and begetting, and all 
whatever is, however great it be. 

XVII 

1. It is by Spirit that all species in the Cosmos are [or] 132 
moved or ruled, - each one according to its proper nature 
given it by God. 

Matter 133 , or Cosmos, on the other hand, is that which 
holds all things, - the field of motion 134 , and the that 
which crowds together 133 all; of which God is the Ruler, 
distributing unto all cosmic things all that is requisite to 
each. 

It is with Spirit that He fills all things, according to the 
quality of each one’s nature. 

2. [Now,] seeing that the hollow roundness 136 of the 
Cosmos is borne round into the fashion of a sphere; by 
reason of its [very] quality or form, it never can be 
altogether visible unto itself. 


1511 [Ed. meaning to ensnare .] 

151 That is, Cosmos. 

152 [Ed. Menard’s original writing, Livre II, p. 135, simply states: “Quant a l’esprit, il fait mouvoir on gouverne tous 
les etres particuliers qui sont dans le monde, selon la nature de Dieu leur a assignee.’ Thus, the extra [or] appears 
superfluous here.] 

153 Again uXt]. 

154 Agitatio. 

155 Freqttentatio. 

156 Cava rotunditas — that is, presumably, concavity. 


-215 - 



So that, however high a place in it thou shouldest choose 
for looking down below, thou could’st not see from it 
what is at bottom, because in many places it confronts 
[the senses], and so is thought to have the quality [of 
being visible throughout] L ' 7 . 

For it is solely owing to the forms of species, with images 
of which it seems insculpted, that it is thought [to be] as 
though ’twere visible [throughout]; but as a fact ’tis ever to 
itself invisible. 

3. Wherefore, its bottom, or its [lowest] part, if [such a] 
place there be within a sphere, is called in Greek a-eides 158 ; 
since that eidein 159 in Greek means “seeing,” - which 
“being-seen” the sphere’s beginning 16 " lacks. 

Flence, too, the species have the name eideai 161 , since 
they’re of form we cannot see. 

Therefore, in that they are deprived of “being-seen,” in 
Greek they are called Hades; in that they are at bottom 162 
of the sphere, they’re called in Latin Inferi. 

These, then, are principal and prior 16 ’, and, as it were, the 
sources and the heads of all the things which are in 
them 164 , through them, or from them. 

XVIII 

1. Asc. All things, then, in themselves (as thou, Thrice- 
greatest one, dost say) are cosmic [principles] (as I should 
say) of all the species which are in them, [or] as it were, 
the sum and substance of each one of them 16 ’. 


157 Propter quod multis locis instat, qnalitatenique habere creditur. The Latin translation is evidently faulty. Menard omits the 
sentence entirely, as he so often does when there is difficulty. 

158 A-siSt]? — that is, “Invisible”; that is, Hades (Ai8f|g or A8r]g). 

159 siSsvv — ? iSsvv. 

160 p>ri mum spheres-, the top or bottom presumably, or periphery, of the world-sphere. 

161 siSsai — ? iSeai — that is, forms, species, — but also used of the highest species, viewed as “ideas.” 

162 Sc. at the centre. 

163 Or principles and priorities ( antiquiora ). 

164 Sc. the “ideas.” 

165 The Latin text is hopeless. 


- 216 - 



Tot. So Cosmos, then, doth nourish bodies; the Spirit, 
souls; the [Higher] Sense (with which Celestial Gift 
mankind alone is blest) 166 doth feed the mind. 

And [these are] not all men, but [they are] few, whose 
minds are of such quality that they can be receptive of so 
great a blessing. 

2. For as the World’s illumined by the Sun, so is the mind 
of man illumined by that Light; nay, in [still] fuller 
measure. 

For whatsoever thing the Sun doth shine upon, it is anon, 
by interjection of the Earth or Moon, or by the 
intervention of the night, robbed of its light. 

But once the [Higher] Sense hath been commingled with 
the soul of man, there is at-onement from the happy 
union of the blending of their natures; so that minds of 
this kind are never more held fast in errors of the 
darkness. 

Wherefore, with reason have they said the [Higher] Senses 
are the souls of Gods; to which I add: not of all Gods, but 
of the great ones [only]; nay, even of the principles of 
these. 


XIX 

1. [VIII. M.] Asc. What dost thou call, Thrice-greatest one, 
the heads of things, or sources of beginnings? 

Tris. Great are the mysteries which I reveal to thee, divine 
the secrets I disclose; and so I make beginning of this 
thing 167 with prayers for Heaven’s favour. 

The hierarchies 168 of Gods are numerous; and of them all 
one class is called the Noumenal 169 , the other [class] the 
Sensible 1711 . 


166 Cf. vii. i. 

167 Initium facio\ or perhaps perform the sacred rite, or give initiation. 

168 Genera. 

169 Intelligibilis (= oi vorpoi); lit. that which can be known by intellect (alone). 

170 Sensibilis (= oi aia0t]Toi); lit. that which can be known by the senses. 


- 217 - 



The former are called Noumenal, not for the reason that 
they’re thought to lie beyond our' 71 senses; for these are 
just the Gods we sense more truly than the ones we call 
the visible, - just as our argument will prove, and thou, if 
thou attend, wilt be made fit to see. 

For that a lofty reasoning, and much more one that is too 
godlike for the mental grasp of [average] men, if that the 
speaker’s words are not received 172 with more attentive 
service of the ears, - will fly and flow beyond them; or 
rather will flow back [again], and mingle with the streams 

r • 173 

or its own source . 

2. There are, then, [certain] Gods who are the principals 1,4 
of all the species. 

Next there come those whose essence 1 75 is their principal. 
These are the Sensible, each similar to its own dual 
source 176 , who by their sensibility 177 affect all things, - the 
one part through the other part [in each] making to shine 
the proper work of every single one. 

Of Heaven, - or of whatsoe’er it be that is embraced 
within the term, - the essence-chief 1 8 is Zeus; for ’tis 
through Heaven that Zeus gives life to all. 

Sun’s essence-chief is light; for the good gift of light is 
poured on us through the Sun’s disk. 

3. The “Thirty-six,” who have the name of Horoscopes 179 , 
are in the [selfj same space as the Fixed Stars; of these the 
essence-chief, or prince, is he whom they call 
Pantomorph, or Omniform 18 °, who fashioneth the various 
forms for various species. 


171 That is, the “Sense” of those who have reached the “Trismegistic” grade, though of course beyond the range of 
the normal senses. 

172 The text is faulty. 

173 Cf. x. 1 above; and C. H., x. (xi.) 17. 

174 Principes. 

175 The Greek original ohoia being retained. 

176 That is, presumably, essence and sensibility. 

177 That is, presumably, their power of affecting the senses. 

178 The Greek ouoiagyt]? is retained in the Latin. 

179 Horoscopi (= cbgooxoTtoi); generally called Decans; tf. Ex. ix., where the Decans are explained. 

18,1 navTOfjioQtpov vel omniformetrr, see xxxv. below; also C. H., xi. (xii.) 16, Comment. 


- 218 - 



The “Seven” who are called spheres, have essence-chiefs, 
that is, [have each] their proper rulers, whom they call [all 
together] Fortune and Heimarmene 181 , whereby all things 
are changed by nature’s law; perpetual stability being 
varied with incessant motion 182 . 

The Air, moreover, is the engine, or machine, through 
which all things are made - (there is, however, an essence- 
chief of this, a second [Air]) - mortal from mortal things 
and things like these 18 ’. 

4. These hierarchies of Gods, then, being thus and [in this 
way] related 184 , from bottom unto top, are [also] thus 
connected with each other, and tend towards themselves; 
so mortal things are bound to mortal, things sensible to 
sensible. 

The whole of [this grand scale of] Rulership, however, 
seems to Him [who is] the Highest Lord, either to be not 
many things, or rather [to be] one. 

For that from One all things depending 18 ’, and flowing 
down from it, - when they are seen as separate, they’re 
thought to be as many as they possibly can be; but in their 
union it is one [thing], or rather two, from which all things 
are made; - that is, from Matter, by means of which the 
other things are made, and by the Will of Him, by nod of 
whom they’re brought to pass. 

XX 

1 . Asc. Is this again the reason, O Thrice-greatest one? 

Tris. It is, Asclepius. For God’s the Father or the Lord of 
all, or whatsoever else may be the name by which He’s 


181 That is, Fate, siftagfjLsvt]. 

182 Quoted in the original Greek by loan. Laurentius Lydus, De Mensibus, iv. 7; Wiinsch (Leipzig, 1898), p. 70, 22; as 
follows: “And Hermes is witness in his [book], called ‘The Perfect Sermon,’ when saying: ‘They that are called the 
Seven Spheres have a Source that is called Fortune or Fate, which changes all things and suffers them not to remain 
in the same [conditions].”’ The quotation is continued without a break; the rest of it, however, corresponds to 
nothing in our context, but is somewhat similar to ch. xxxix. 1, 2. 

183 That is, the region of things subject to death. The text is faulty. Cf with this “engine” the “cylinder” of the K. K. 
Fragments (10). 

184 Ab imo ad summum se admoventibur, for admoventibns compare “ genus admotum superis” Silius Italicus, viii. 295. 

185 Cf. iv. 1 above, and the note. 


- 219 - 



named more holily and piously by men, - which should be 
set apart among ourselves for sake of our intelligence. 

For if we contemplate this so transcendent God, we shall 
not make Him definite by any of these names. 

For if a [spoken] word 186 is this: - a sound proceeding 
from the air, when struck by breath 187 , denoting the whole 
will, perchance, of man, or else the [higher] sense, which 
by good chance a man perceives by means of mind, when 
out of [all his] senses 188 , - a name the stuff of which, made 
of a syllable or two, has so been limited and pondered, 
that it might serve in man as necessary link between the 
voice and ear; - thus [must] the Name of God in full 
consist of Sense, and Spirit, and of Air, and of all things in 
them, or through, or with them 189 . 

2. Indeed, I have no hope that the Creator of the whole of 
Greatness, the Father and the Lord of all the things [that 
are], could ever have one name, even although it should 
be made up of a multitude - He who cannot be named, or 
rather He who can be called by every name. 

For He, indeed, is One and All 190 ; so that it needs must be 
that all things should be called by the same name as His, 
or He Himself called by the names of all. 

3. He, then, alone, yet all-complete in the fertility of either 
sex, ever with child of His own Will, doth ever bring to 
birth whatever He hath willed to procreate. 

His Will is the All-goodness, which also is the Goodness 
of all things, born from the nature of His own Divinity, - 
in order that all things may be, just as they all have been, 
and that henceforth the nature of being born from their 
own selves may be sufficient to all things that will be 
born. 


186 Vox (= name), presumably Xoyoq in the original; a play on “word” and “reason,” but also referring to the 
mysterious “name” of a person. 

187 Spirit n, or spirit. 

188 Ex sensibus - presumably, in ecstasis. 

189 The text of this paragraph is very unsatisfactory. 

190 Cf. i. 1 above. 


- 220 - 



Let this, then, be the reason given thee, Asclepius, 
wherefore and how all things are made of either sex. 

XXI 

1. Asc. Thou speak’st of God, then, O Thrice-greatest 
one? 

Tris. Not only God, Asclepius, but all things living and 
inanimate. For ’tis impossible that any of the things that 
are should be unfruitful. 

For if fecundity should be removed from all the things 
that are, it could not be that they should be for ever what 
they are. I mean that Nature 191 , Sense, and Cosmos, have 
in themselves the power of being born 192 , and of 
preserving all things that are born. 

For either sex is full of procreation; and of each one there 
is a union, or, - what’s more true, - a unity incompre- 
hensible; which you may rightly call Eros 19 ’ or Aphrodite, 
or both [names]. 

2. This, then, is truer than all truth, and plainer than what 
the mind [’s eye] perceives; - that from that Universal God 
of Universal Nature all other things for evermore have 
found, and had bestowed on them, the mystery of 
bringing forth; in which there is innate the sweetest 
Charity, [and] Joy, [and] Merriment, Longing, and Love 
Divine. 

We might have had to tell the mighty power and the 
compulsion of this mystery, if it had not been able to be 
known by every one from personal experience, by 
observation of himself. 

3. For if thou should’st regard that supreme [point] of 
time when . . , 194 the one nature doth pour forth the young 
into the other one, and when the other greedily absorbs 
[it] from the first, and hides it [ever] deeper [in itself]; 
then, at that time, out of their common congress, females 


191 Here, presumably, meaning hyle. 

192 Na tt tram again. 

193 Cf. 1, 2, above. 

194 Quo ex crebro attritu pmrinms lit ... . 


-221 - 



attain the nature of the males, males weary grow with 
female listlessness. 

And so the consummation of this mystery, so sweet and 
requisite, is wrought in secret; lest, owing to the vulgar 
jests of ignorance, the deity of either sex should be 
compelled to blush at natural congress, - and much more 
still, if it should be subjected to the sight of impious folk. 

XXII 

1. The pious are not numerous, however; nay, they are 
very few, so that they may be counted even in the 
world 195 . 

Whence it doth come about, that in the many bad inheres, 
through defect of the Gnosis and Discernment of the 
things that are. 

For that it is from the intelligence of Godlike Reason 196 , 
by which all things are ordered, there come to birth 
contempt and remedy of vice throughout the world. 

But when unknowingness and ignorance persist, all 
vicious things wax strong, and plague the soul with 
wounds incurable; so that, infected with them, and 
invitiated, it swells up, as though it were with poisons, - 
except for those who know the Discipline of souls and 
highest Cure of intellect. 

2. So, then, although it may do good to few alone, ’tis 
proper to develope and explain this thesis: - wherefore 
Divinity hath deigned to share His science and intelligence 
with men alone. Give ear, accordingly! 

When God, [our] Sire and Lord, made man, after the 
Gods, out of an equal mixture of a less pure cosmic part 
and a divine, - it [naturally] came to pass the 
imperfections 197 of the cosmic part remained commingled 
with [our] frames, and other ones 198 [as well], by reason of 
the food and sustenance we have out of necessity in 


195 Cf. Ex. i. 16. 

196 Cf. vii. 1 above. 

197 Vitia\ lit. vices. 

198 re. imperfections. 


- 222 - 



common with all lives 199 ; by reason of which things it 
needs must be that the desires, and passions, and other 
vices, of the mind should occupy the souls of human kind. 

3. As for the Gods, in as much as they had been made of 
Nature’s fairest 201 ' part, and have no need of the supports 
of reason and of discipline 201 , - although, indeed, their 
deathlessness, the very strength of being ever of one 
single age, stands in this case for prudence and for 
science, still, for the sake of reason’s unity, instead of 
science and of intellect (so that the Gods should not be 
strange to these), - He, by His everlasting law, decreed for 
them an order 202 , circumscribed by the necessity of law. 

While as for man, He doth distinguish him from all the 
other animals by reason and by discipline alone; by means 
of which men can remove and separate their bodies’ vices, 
- He helping them to hope and effort after deathlessness. 

4. In fine. He hath made man both good and able to share 
in immortal life, - out of two natures, [one] mortal, [one] 
divine. 

And just because he is thus fashioned by the Will of God, 
it is appointed that man should be superior both to the 
Gods, who have been made of an immortal nature only, 
and also to all mortal things. 

It is because of this that man, being joined unto the Gods 
by kinsmanship, doth reverence them with piety and holy 
mind; while, on their side, the Gods with pious sympathy 
regard and guard all things of men. 

XXIII 

1. But this can only be averred of a few men endowed 
with pious minds. Still, of the rest, the vicious folk, we 
ought to say no word, for fear a very sacred sermon 
should be spoiled by thinking of them. 


199 Lit. animals. 

200 Mundissima — that is, most cosmic, or “adorned.” 

201 Or science. 

202 Ordinem — that is, Cosmos. Compare this also with the idea of the Gnostic Horos which “surrounds” the Pleroma. 


- 223 - 



[IX. M.] And 21 ' 1 since our sermon treats of the relationship 
and intercourse 2 " 4 of men and Gods, - learn, Asclepius, 
the power and strength of man! 

[Our] Lord and Father, or what is Highest God, - as He’s 
Creator of the Gods in Heaven, so man’s the maker of the 
gods who, in the temples, suffer man’s approach, and who 
not only have light poured on them, but who send forth 
[their] light [on all]; not only does a man go forward 
towards the God[s], but also he confirms the Gods [on 
earth] 205 . 

Art thou surprised, Asclepius; nay is it not that even thou 
dost not believe? 

2. Asc. I am amazed, Thrice-greatest one; but willingly I 
give assent to [all] thy words. I judge that man most blest 
who hath attained so great felicity. 

Tris. And righdy so; [for] he deserves our wonder, in that 
he is the greatest of them all. 

As for the genus of the Gods in Heaven, - ’tis plain from 
the commixture 2 " 6 of them all, that it has been made 
pregnant from the fairest part of nature 2 " 7 , and that the 
only signs [by which they are discerned] are, as it were, 
before all else their heads 2 " 8 . 

3. Whereas the species of the gods which humankind 
constructs is fashioned out of either nature, - out of that 
nature which is more ancient and far more divine, and out 
of that which is in men; that is, out of the stuff of which 
they have been made and are configured, not only in their 
heads alone, but also in each limb and their whole frame. 

And 2 " 9 so mankind, in imaging Divinity, stays mindful of 
the nature and the source of its own self. 


203 This sentence and the first half of the next, down to “suffer man’s approach,” is quoted word for word in Latin 
by Augustine, De Civitate Dei, xxiii. 

204 Cf. C. H, x. (xi.) 22. 

205 The Latin translation of this paragraph seems confused. 

206 This is, apparently, the “star stuff’ of which their bodies are made. 

207 De mundissima parte natures esse prcegnatum — whatever that means; but cf. p. 348, n. 1. 

208 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 10, 11. 

209 This sentence, together with the first five sentences of the next chapter, down to the words “and constant 
worship,” are quoted in Latin with two or three slight verbal variants by Augustine, De Civitate Dei, xxiii. 


- 224 - 



So that, just as [our] Sire and Lord did make the Gods 
asonian, that they might be like Him; so hath mankind 
configured its own gods according to the likeness of the 
look of its own self 210 . 


XXIV 

1. Asc. Thou dost not mean their statues, dost thou, O 
Thrice-greatest one? 

Tris. [I mean their] statues, O Asclepius, - dost thou not 
see how much thou even, doubtest? - statues, ensouled 
with sense, and filled with spirit, which work such mighty 
and such [strange] results, - statues which can foresee 
what is to come, and which perchance can prophesy, 
foretelling things by dreams and many other ways, - 
[statues] that take their strength away from men, or cure 
their sorrow, if they do so deserve. 

Dost thou not know, Asclepius, that Egypt is the image of 
the Heaven 211 ; or, what is truer still, the transference, or 
the descent, of all that are in governance or exercise in 
Heaven? And if more truly [still] it must be said, - this 
land of ours is Shrine of all the World. 

2. Further, in that ’tis fitting that the prudent should know 
all before, it is not right ye should be ignorant of this. 

The time will come when Egypt will appear to have in 
vain served the Divinity with pious mind and constant 
worship 212 ; and all its holy cult will fall to nothingness and 
be in vain. 

For that Divinity is now about to hasten back from Earth 
to Heaven, and Egypt shall be left; and Earth, which was 
the seat of pious cults, shall be bereft and widowed of the 
presence of the Gods. 

And foreigners shall fill this region and this land; and 
there shall be not only the neglect of pious cults, but - 
what is still more painful, - as though enacted by the laws, 


210 Cf xxxvii. 2 below. 

211 Cf Comment, on K K., 46-48. 

212 Augustine’s quotation ends here. 


- 225 - 



a penalty shall be decreed against the practice of [our] 
pious cults and worship of the Gods - [entire] 
proscription of them. 

3. Then shall this holiest land, seat of [our] shrines and 
temples, be choked with tombs and corpses 21 ’. 

O Egypt, Egypt, of thy pious cults tales only will remain, 
as far beyond belief for thy own sons [as for the rest of 
men]; words only will be left cut on thy stones, thy pious 
deeds recounting! 

And Egypt will be made the home of Scyth 214 or Indian, 
or some one like to them, - that is a foreign neighbour 21 ’. 

Ay, for the Godly company 216 shall mount again to 
Heaven, and their forsaken worshippers shall all die out; 
and Egypt, thus bereft of God and man, shall be 
abandoned. 

4. And now I speak to thee, O River, holiest [Stream]! I 
tell thee what will be. With bloody torrents shalt thou 
overflow thy banks. Not only shall thy streams divine be 
stained with blood; but they shall all flow over [with the 
same] . 

The tale of tombs shall far exceed the [number of the] 
quick; and the surviving remnant shall be Egyptians in 
their tongue alone, but in their actions foreigners. 

XXV 

1. Why dost thou weep, Asclepius? Nay, more than this, 
by far more wretched, - Egypt herself shall be impelled 
and stained with greater ills. 

For she, the Holy [Land], and once deservedly the most 
beloved by God, by reason of her pious service of the 
Gods on earth, - she, the sole colony 217 of holiness, and 


213 Sepulchrorum erit mortuorumque plenissima. This sentence is quoted verbatim by Augustine, De Civitate Dei, xxvi. 

214 Compare Colossians iii. 11: “Where there is neither Greek nor jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, barbarian, 
Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ is all, and in all.” 

215 Vicina barbaria-, lit. a neighbouring foreign country. Compare this with the previous note. It is strange the two, 
Scyth and barbarian, coming twice together. 

216 Divinitas. 

217 Dednctio the technical term for leading out a colony from the metropolis or mother city. Compare Philo, De Vita 
Contenrplativa, P. 892, M. 474 (Conybeare, p. 58): “In Egypt there are crowds of them [the Therapeuts] in every 


- 226 - 



teacher of religion [on the earth], shall be the type of all 
that is most barbarous. 

And then, out of our loathing for mankind, the World will 
seem no more deserving of our wonder and our praise. 

All this good thing 218 , - than which there has been fairer 
naught that can be seen, nor is there anything, nor will 
there [ever] be, - will be in jeopardy. 

2. And it will prove a burden unto men; and on account 
of this they will despise and cease to love this Cosmos as a 
whole, - the changeless work of God; the glorious 
construction of the Good, comprised of multifold variety 
of forms; the engine of God’s Will, supporting His own 
work ungrudgingly; the multitudinous whole massed in a 
unity of all, that should be reverenced, praised and loved, - 
by them at least who have the eyes to see. 

For Darkness will be set before the Light, and Death will 
be thought preferable to Life. No one will raise his eyes to 
Heaven; the pious man will be considered mad, the 
impious a sage; the frenzied held as strong, the worst as 
best. 

3. For soul, and all concerning it, - whereby it doth 
presume that either it hath been born deathless, or that it 
will attain to deathlessness, according to the argument I 
have set forth for you, - [all this] will be considered not 
only food for sport 219 , but even vanity. 

Nay, [if ye will] believe me, the penalty of death shall be 
decreed to him who shall devote himself to the Religion 
of the Mind. 

New statutes shall come into force, a novel law; naught 
[that is] sacred, nothing pious, naught that is worthy of the 
Heaven, or Gods in Heaven, shall [e’er] be heard, or 
[even] mentally believed. 


province, or nome as they call it, and especially at Alexandria. For they who are in every way the most highly 
advanced, lead out a colony (aTioixiav axeXXovxai), as it were to the Therapeutic father-land”; and also the numerous 
parallel passages cited by Conybeare from Philo’s other writings. 

218 Sc. the Cosmos. 

219 Qixii.2 above. 


- 227 - 



4. The sorrowful departure of the Gods from men takes 
place; bad angels 2211 only stay, who mingled with humanity 
will lay their hands on them, and drive the wretched folk 
to every ill of recklessness, - to wars, and robberies, 

deceits, and all those things that are opposed to the soul’s 

221 

nature . 

Then shall the Earth no longer hold together; the Sea no 
longer shall be sailed upon; nor shall the Heaven continue 
with the Courses of the Stars, nor the Star-course in 
Heaven. 

The voice of every God 222 shall cease in the [Great] 
Silence that no one can break; the fruits of Earth shall rot; 
nay, Earth no longer shall bring forth; and Air itself shall 
faint in that sad listlessness. 

XXVI 

E This, when it comes, shall be the World’s old age, 
impiety, - irregularity, and lack of rationality in all good 
things. 

And when these things all come to pass, Asclepius, - then 
He, [our] Lord and Sire, God First in power, and Ruler of 
the One God [Visible] 22 ’, in check of crime, and calling 
error back from the corruption of all things unto good 
manners and to deeds spontaneous with His Will (that is 
to say God’s Goodness), - ending all ill, by either washing 
it away with water-flood, or burning it away with fire, or 
by the means of pestilent diseases, spread throughout all 
hostile lands, - God will recall the Cosmos to its ancient 
form 224 ; so that the World itself shall seem meet to be 


220 Nocentes angeli, — usually daimones in our tractates; still, as Lactantius ( D . L, ii. 15) says that Hermes calls the 
daimones “evil angels” (ayykXooz n ovrjQoin;), he most probably took it from the Greek original of our sermon. 

221 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 21. 

222 Omnis vox diviner, or, perhaps, the “whole Word of God.” 

223 That is, Cosmos. 

224 The above passage is cited in the original Greek by Lactantius ( D . 1., vii. 8) as from the “Perfect Sermon” of 
Hermes. As we might expect from what had been already said on this subject, it differs from our Latin translation, 
and runs as follows: 

“Now when these things shall be as I have said, Asclepius, then will [our] Lord and Sire, the God and Maker of 
the First and the One God, look down on what is done, and making firm His Will, that is the Good, against 
disorder, — recalling error, and cleaning out the bad, either by washing it away with water-flood, or burning it away 
with swiftest fire, or forcibly expelling it with war and famine, — will bring again His Cosmos to its former state, and 
so achieve its Restoration.” 


- 228 - 



worshipped and admired; and God, the Maker and 
Restorer of so vast a work, be sung by the humanity who 
shall be then, with ceaseless heraldings of praise and 
[hymns of] blessing. 

2. For this [Re-] birth of Cosmos is the making new 22 ' of 
all good things, and the most holy and most pious 
bringing-back again of Nature’s self, by means of a set 
course of time, - of Nature, which was without beginning, 
and which is without an end. For that God’s Will hath no 
beginning; and, in that ’tis the same and as it is, it is 
without an end. 

Asc. Because God’s Nature’s the Determination 226 of the 
Will. Determination is the Highest Good; is it not so, 
Thrice-greatest one? 

3. Tris. Asclepius, Will is Determination’s child; nay, 
willing in itself comes from the Will. 

Not that He willeth aught desiring it; for that He is the 
Fullness of all things, and wills what things He has. 

He thus wills all good things, and has all that He wills. 
Nay, rather, He doth think and will all good. 

This, then, is God; the World of Good’s His Image. 

XXVII 

1. Asc. [Is Cosmos] good, Thrice-greatest one? 

Tris. [’Tis] good 227 , as I will teach thee, O Asclepius. 

For just as God is the Apportioner and Steward of good 
things to all the species, or [more correctly] genera, which 
are in Cosmos, - that is to say, of Sense 228 , and Soul, and 
Life, - so Cosmos is the giver and bestower of all things 
which seem unto [us] mortals good; - that is to say, the 
alternation of its parts, of seasonable fruits, birth, growth, 
maturity, and things like these. 


225 Cf. C. H, Hi. (iv.) 1. 

226 Consilium = (3outr). 

227 This seems a formal contradiction of C. H., x. (xi.) 10, but is not really so. 

228 Meaning higher sense, presumably; reading sensns for sensibus. 


- 229 - 



And for this cause God doth transcend the height of 
highest Heaven, extending everywhere, and doth behold 
all things on every side. 

2. Beyond the Heaven starless Space doth stretch, stranger 
to every thing possessed of body. 

The Dispensator who’s between the Heaven and Earth, is 
Ruler of the Space which we call Zeus [Above]. 

The Earth and Sea is ruled by Zeus Below 229 ; he is the 
Nourisher of mortal lives, and of fruit-bearing [trees]. 

It is by reason of the powers of all of these 2 ’ 1 ' that fruits, 
and trees, and earth, grow green. 

The powers and energies of [all] the other [Gods] will be 
distributed through all the things that are. 

3. Yea, they who rule the earth shall be distributed 
[through all the lands], and [finally] be gathered in a 
state 2 ’ 1 , - at top of Egypt’s upper part 2 ’ 2 , - which shall be 
founded towards the setting sun, and to which all the 
mortal race shall speed. 

Ajc. But now, just at this moment, where are they, Thrice- 
greatest one? 

Tris. They’re gathered in a very large community 2 ”, upon 
the Libyan Hill 2 ’ 4 . And now enough concerning this hath 
been declared. 

4. [X. M.] But now the question as to deathlessness or as 
to death must be discussed. 

The expectation and the fear of death torture the 
multitude, who do not know True Reason. 

Now death is brought about by dissolution of the body, 
wearied out with toil, and of the number, when complete, 
by which the body’s members are arranged into a single 


229 Jupiter Plutonius. Menard suggests “ Zens souterrain ( Sarapis ?)”; the original was probably Zeus Aidoneus. 

230 It is not clear who “these” are; perhaps all that have so far been mentioned, but this does not seem satisfactory. 
Doubtless the Latin translation is, as usual, at fault. 

231 Or city. 

232 In sunwio Mgypti initio. 

233 Civitate. 

234 In monte Libyco; lit. on a (or the) Libycan, or Libyan or African Hill or Mount. Compare with this xxxvii. below. 


- 230 - 



engine for the purposes of life. The body dies, when it no 
longer can support the life-powers 213 of a man. 

This, then, is death, - the body’s dissolution, and the 
disappearance of corporeal sense 2 ’ 6 . 

As to this death anxiety is needless. But there’s another 
[death] which no man can escape 2 ’ 7 , but which the 
ignorance and unbelief of man think litde of. 

5. Asc. What is it, O Thrice-greatest one, that men know 
nothing of, or disbelieve that it can be? 

Tris. So, lend thy ear, Asclepius! 

XXVIII 

1. When, [then,] the soul’s departure from the body shall 
take place, - then shall the judgment and the weighing of 
its merit pass into its highest daimon’s power 2 ’ 8 . 

And when he sees it pious is and just, - he suffers it to rest 
in spots appropriate to it. 

But if he find it soiled with stains of evil deeds, and fouled 
with vice, - he drives it from Above into the Depths, and 
hands it o’er to warring hurricanes and vortices of Air, of 
Fire, and Water 2 ’ 9 . 


235 Vitalia. 

236 This passage is quoted in the original Greek by Stobasus, Florilegium, cxx. 27 (G. iii. 464; M. iv. 105, 106; Pat. 45, 
under title “Death”), under the heading “Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Asclepius.” It runs as follows: 

“Now must we speak of death. For death affrights the many as the greatest of all ills, in ignorance of fact. Death 
is the dissolution of the toiling frame. For when the ‘number’ of the body’s joints becomes complete, — the basis of 
the body’s jointing being number, — that body dies; [that is,] when it no longer can support the man. And this is 
death, — the body’s dissolution and the disappearance of corporeal sense.” 

The directness and the sturdy vigour of the Greek original has clearly lost much in the rhetorical paraphrasing of 
the Latin translator. 

237 Necessaria. 

238 Cf. C. H, x. (xi.) 21. 

239 The substance of these two sentences is contained in a “quotation” from the Greek by J. Laurentius Lydus, De 
Mensibus, iv. 149 (Wiinsch, 167, 15): “According to the Egyptian Hermes who, in what is called ‘The Perfect Sermon,’ 
says as follows: ‘But such souls as transgress the norm of piety, when they do leave their body, are handed over to 
the daimones and carried downwards through the air, cast forth as from a sling into the zones of fire and hail, which 
poets call Pyriphlegethon and Tartarus.’” That this is a “quotation,” however, I doubt very much, for if we compare 
it with D. M., iv. 31 (W. 90, 24), which very faintly echoes the teaching of our chaps, iv., v., xxvii., we shall find that 
Tartarus and Pyriphlegethon are entirely due to Laurentius himself. The passage mns as follows: 

“For the Egyptian Hermes, in his Sermon called Perfect, says that the Avenging of the daimones, being present in 
matter itself, chastise the human part [of us] according as it has deserved; while the Purifying ones confined to the air 
purify the souls after death that are trying to soar aloft, [conducting them] round the haily and fiery zones of the air, 
which the poets and Plato himself in the Phado call Tartarus and Pyriphlegethon; while the Saving ones again, 
stationed in the lunar space, save the souls.” Cf. Ex. ix. 6. 


-231 - 



2. ’Twixt Heaven and Earth, upon the waves of Cosmos, 
is it dragged in contrary directions, for ever racked with 
ceaseless pains 240 ; so that in this its deathless nature doth 
afflict the soul, in that because of its unceasing sense, it 
hath the yoke of ceaseless torture set upon its neck. 

Know, then, that we should dread, and be afraid, and 
[ever] be upon our guard, lest we should be entangled in 
these [toils]. 

For those who do not now believe, will after their 
misdeeds be driven to believe, by facts not words, by 
actual sufferings of punishment and not by threats. 

3. Asc. The faults of men are not, then, punished, O 
Thrice-greatest one, by law of man alone? 

Tris. In the first place, Asclepius, all things on Earth must 
die. 

Further, those things which live by reason of a body, and 
which do cease from living by reason of the same, - all 
these, according to the merits of this life, or its demerits, 
find due [rewards or] punishments. 

[And as to punishments] they’re all the more severe, if in 
their life [their misdeeds] chance to have been hidden, till 
their death 241 . For [then] they will be made full conscious 
of all things by the divinity, just as they are, according to 
the shades of punishment allotted to their crimes. 


24<l Menard here quotes a couple of lines from Empedocles (c. 494-434 B.C.), cited by Plutarch, but without giving 
any reference. They are from the famous passage beginning Ecrav avayxr]<; xgrjpa x-t-L (369-382), of which the 
following is Fairbanks’ translation. See Fairbanks (A.), The First Philosophers of Greece (London, 1898), p. 205: 

“There is an utterance of Necessity, an ancient decree of the Gods, eternal, sealed fast with broad oaths: 
Whenever any one defiles his body sinfully with bloody gore or perjures himself in regard to wrongdoing, — one of 
those spirits who are heir to long life (Salpwv owe paxgaiwve? XeXkyaai (3ioto), — thrice ten thousand seasons shall he 
wander apart from the blessed, being born meanwhile in all sorts of mortal forms (tpuopevov Ttavxova 8ia xpbvou 
ei'Sea 6vt]T(av) changing one bitter path of life for another. For mighty Air pursues him Seaward, and Sea spews him 
forth on the threshold of Earth, and Earth casts him into the rays of the unwearied Sun, and Sun into the eddies of 
Air: one receives him from the other, and all hate him. One of these now am I too, a fugitive from the gods and a 
wanderer, at the mercy of raging Strife.” 

241 Cf. the Vision of Thespesius (Aridteus) in Plutarch, De Sera Numinis Vindicta : “Thus he had to see that the shades 
of notorious criminals who had been punished in earth-life were not so hardly dealt with . . . ; whereas those who 
had passed their lives in undetected vice, under cloak and show of virtue, were hemmed in by the retributory agents, 
and forced with labour and pain to turn their souls inside out.” 


- 232 - 



XXIX 


1. Asc. And these deserve [still] greater punishments, 
Thrice-greatest one? 

Tris. [Assuredly;] for those condemned by laws of man do 
lose their life by violence, so that [all] men may see they 
have not yielded up their soul to pay the debt of nature, 
but have received the penalty of their deserts. 

Upon the other hand, the righteous man finds his defence 
in serving God and deepest piety. For God doth guard 
such men from every ill 242 . 

2. Yea, He who is the Sire of all, [our] Lord, and who 
alone is all, doth love to show Himself to all. 

It is not by the place where he may be, nor by the quality 
which he may have, nor by the greatness which he may 
possess, but by the mind’s intelligence alone, that He doth 
shed His light on man, - [on him] who shakes the clouds 
of Error from his soul, and sights the brilliancy of 
Truth 24 ’, mingling himself with the All-sense of the Divine 
Intelligence; through love 244 of which he wins his freedom 
from that part of him o’er which Death rules, and has the 
seed of the assurance of his future Deathlessness 
implanted in him. 

3. This, then, is how the good will differ from the bad. 
Each several one will shine in piety, in sanctity, in 
prudence, in worship, and in service of [our] God, and see 
True Reason, as though [he looked at it] with [corporal] 
eyes; and each will by the confidence of his belief excel all 
other men, as by its light the Sun the other stars 243 . 

For that it is not so much by the greatness of his light as 
by his holiness and his divinity, the Sun himself lights up 
the other stars 246 . 

Yea, [my] Asclepius, thou should’st regard him as the 
second God 247 , ruling all things, and giving light to all 

242 Compare the Fragment quoted in Greek by Lactantius, D. I, ii. 15, and by Cyril, C.J., iv. 130. 

243 Cf. xiii. (xiv.) 7-9, Comment. 

244 Cf. xii. 3 above. 

245 Astris. 

246 Stellas. 


- 233 - 



things living in the Cosmos, whether ensouled or 
unensouled. 

For if the Cosmos is a living thing, and if it has been, and 
it is, and will be ever-living, - naught in the Cosmos is 
subject to death. 

For of an ever-living thing, it is [the same] of every part 
which is; [that is,] that ’tis [as ever-living] as it is [itself]; 
and in the World itself [which is] for everyone, and at the 
self-same time an ever-living thing of life, - in it there is 
no place for death 248 . 

5. And so he 249 should be the full store of life and 
deathlessness; if that it needs must be that he should live 
for ever. 

And so the Sun, just as the Cosmos, lasts for aye. So is he, 
too, for ever ruler of [all] vital powers, or of [our] whole 
vitality; he is their ruler, or the one who gives them out. 

God, then, is the eternal ruler of all living things, or vital 
functions, that are in the World. He is the everlasting 
giver-forth of Life itself 2 ' 11 . 

Once for all [time] He hath bestowed Life on all vital 
powers; He further doth preserve them by a law that lasts 
for evermore, as I will [now] explain. 

XXX 

1. For in the very Life of the Eternity 251 is Cosmos moved; 
and in the very Everlastingness 2 ' 2 of Life [itself] is Cosmic 
Space 237 . 

On which account it 234 shall not stop at any time, nor shall 
it be destroyed; for that its very self is palisaded 233 round 


247 Cf. C. H, xvi. 5. ff. 

248 The text of this paragraph is very corrupt. 

249 That is, the Sun. 

250 See Comment on C. H., xvi. 17. 

251 Mternitatis, doubtless aicovo? in the original Greek, — that is, the iEon; f. x. 2 above. For the general iEon-doctrine, 
see chap, xi. in the Prolegomena, and xxxii. 1 below. 

252 JEternitate\ iEon again. 

253 Lit. the Space of Cosmos; cf. xv. 1 above. 

254 Sc. Cosmos. 

255 Circumvallatns et quasi constrictus. Compare with this the idea of the Horos or Boundary in the asonology of “Them 
of Valentinus,” as set forth by Hippolytus ( Vhilosophnn/ena , vi. 31): 


- 234 - 




about, and bound together as it were, by Living’s 
Sempiternity 256 . 

Cosmos is [thus] Life-giver unto all that are in it, and is 
the Space of all that are in governance beneath the Sun. 

The motion of the Cosmos in itself consisteth of a two- 
fold energy. ’Tis vivified itself from the without by the 
Eternity 257 , and vivifies all things that are within, making 
all different, by numbers and by times, fixed and 
appointed [for them] . 

2. Now Time’s distinguished on the Earth by quality of 
air, by variation of its heat and cold; in Heaven by the 
returnings of the stars to the same spots, the revolution of 
their course in Time. 

And while the Cosmos is the home 258 of Time 2 ' 59 , it is kept 
green [itself] by reason of Time’s course and motion. 

Time, on the other hand, is kept by regulation. Order and 
Time effect renewal of all things which are in Cosmos by 
means of alternation. 

3. [XI. M.] All things, then, being thus, there’s nothing 
stable, nothing fixed, nothing immoveable, of things that 
are being born, in Heaven or on the Earth. 

Immoveable 26 " [is] God alone, and rightly [He] alone; for 
He Himself is in Himself, and by Himself, and round 
Himself, completely full and perfect. 

He is His own immoveable stability. Nor by the pressure 
of some other one can He be moved, nor in the space [of 
anyone] . 


“Moreover that the formlessness of the Abortion should finally never again make itself visible to the perfect 
iEons, the Father Himself also sent forth the additional emanation of a single iEon, the Cross [or Stock, xov 
croxugov], which being created great, as [the creature] of the great and perfect Father, and emanated to be the Guard 
and Wall of protection [lit. Paling or Stockade — yagaxcopa, the Roman vallun. ?] of the iEons, constitutes the 
Boundary ( 5 qoq) of the Pleroma, holding the thirty iEons together within itself. For these [thirty] are they which 
form the divine creation.” See F. F. F., p. 342. 

256 [Ed. meaning (in philosophy)', existence within time but infinitely into the future; as opposed to eternity, understood 
as existing outside time.] 

257 That is, the iEon. 

258 Tkeceptaculum. 

259 Cf. C. H, xi. (xii.) 2. 

260 That is, changeless. 


- 235 - 



4. For in Him are all [spaces], and He Himself alone is in 
them all; unless someone should venture to assert that 
God’s own motion’s in Eternity 261 ; nay, rather, it is just 
Immoveable Eternity itself, back into which the motion of 
all times is funded, and out of which the motion of all 
times takes its beginning. 

XXXI 

1. God, then, hath [ever] been unchanging 262 , and ever, in 
like fashion, with Himself hath the Eternity consisted, - 
having within itself Cosmos ingenerate, which we 
correctly call [God] Sensible 26 ’. 

Of that [transcendent] Deity this Image 264 hath been 
made, - Cosmos the imitator of Eternity. 

Time, further, hath the strength and nature of its own 
stability, in spite of its being in perpetual motion, - from 
its necessity of [ever] from itself reverting to itself. 

2. And so, although Eternity is stable, motionless, and 
fixed, still, seeing that the movement of [this] Time (which 
is subject to motion) is ever being recalled into Eternity, - 
and for that reason Time’s mobility is circular, - it comes 
to pass that the Eternity itself, although in its own self, is 
motionless, [yet] on account of Time, in which it is - (and 
it is in it), - it seems to be in movement as all motion. 

So that it comes to pass, that both Eternity’s stability 
becometh moved, and Time’s mobility becometh stable. 

So may we ever hold that God Himself is moved into 
Himself by [ever-] same transcendency of motion 26 ’. 

For that stability is in His vastness motion motionless; for 
by His vastness is [His] law exempt from change 266 . 

3. That, then, which so transcends, which is not subject 
unto sense, [which is] beyond all bounds, [and which] 


261 That is, again, in the iEon. 

262 Stabilis. 

263 Cf. viii. 1 above. 

264 Cf. x. 3 above. 

265 Eadem inimobilitate. The whole is an endeavour to at-one the “Platonic” root-opposites “same” (Talkov) and 
“other” (Oaxsgov) — the “Self’ and the “not-Self,” sat-asat , dtmdndtman , of the Upanishads. 

266 Lit. motionless. 


- 236 - 



cannot be grasped, - That transcends all appraisement; 
That cannot be supported, nor borne up, nor can it be 
tracked out 267 . 

For where, and when, and whence, and how, and what, 
He is, - is known to none 268 . For He’s borne up by [His] 
supreme stability, and His stability is in Himself [alone], - 
whether [this mystery] be God, or the Eternity, or both, or 
one in other, or both in either. 

4. And for this cause, just as Eternity transcends the 
bounds of Time; so Time [itself], in that it cannot have 
bounds set to it by number, or by change, or by the period 
of the revolution of some second [kind of Time], - is of 
the nature of Eternity. 

Both, then, seem boundless, both eternal. And so stability, 
though naturally fixed, yet seeing that it can sustain the 
things that are in motion, - because of all the good it does 
by reason of its firmness, deservedly doth hold the 
chiefest place. 

XXXII 

1. The principals of all that are, are, therefore, God and 
JEon 269 . 

The Cosmos, on the other hand, in that ’tis moveable, is 
not a principal 270 . 

For its mobility exceeds its own stability by treating the 
immoveable fixation as the law of everlasting movement. 

The Whole Sense 271 , then, of the Divinity, though like [to 
Him] in its own self immoveable, doth set itself in motion 
within its own stability. 

’Tis holy, incorruptible, and everlasting, and if there can 
be any better attribute to give to it, [’tis its], - Eternity of 
God supreme, in Truth itself subsisting, the Fullness of all 


267 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 6; also xxxiv. 3 below. 

268 Compare the Hymn in C. H., v. (vi.) 10, 11. 

269 Or Eternity. 

270 Lit. does not hold the chief place. 

211 Cf. 3 below. 


- 237 - 



things, of Sense, and of the whole of Science, consisting, 
so to say, with God 272 . 

2. The Cosmic Sense is the container 2 ' 1 of all sensibles, 
[all] species, and [all] sciences. 

The human [higher sense consists] in the retentiveness of 
memory, in that it can recall all things that it hath done. 

For only just as far as the man-animal has the divinity of 
Sense 274 descended; in that God hath not willed the 
highest Sense divine should be commingled with the rest 
of animals; lest it should blush for shame 2 ' on being 
mingled with the other lives. 

For whatsoever be the quality, or the extent, of the 
intelligence of a man’s Sense, the whole of it consists in 
power of recollecting what is past. 

It is through his retentiveness of memory, that man’s been 
made the ruler of the earth. 

3. Now the intelligence of Nature 2,6 can be won by quality 
of Cosmic Sense, - from all the things in Cosmos which 
sense can perceive. 

Concerning \this\ Eternity, which is the second [one], - the 
Sense of this we get from out the senses’ Cosmos, and we 
discern its quality [by the same means]. 

But the intelligence of Quality [itself], the “Whatness” of 
the Sense of God Supreme, is Truth alone, - of which 
[pure] Truth not even the most tenuous sketch, or 
[faintest] shade, in Cosmos is discerned. 


272 Consistens, nt ita dixerim, cum deo. Is there possibly here underlying the Latin consistens cum deo the expanded form of 
the peculiar and elliptical nQOq tov 6sov of the Proem to the Fourth Gospel (the apud deum of the Vulgate)? This was 
explained by the Gnostic Ptolemy, somewhere about the middle of the second century, as “at-one-ment with God,” 
in his exegesis of the opening words, which he glosses as: “The at-one-ment with each other, together with their at- 
one-ment with the Father” (f| kqo <; aXkfkoix; apa xai f) tiqoq tov Ttatsga Evcoaig). So that the first verse of the Proem 
would run: “In the Beginning was the Logos, and the Logos was (one) with God; yea, the Logos was God. He was in 
the Beginning (one) with God” — ? consistens cum deo. See Irenteus, Ref. Om. Fleer., I. viii. 5 — Stieren (Leipzig; 1853), i. 
102; also F. F. F., p. 388. 

273 Or receptacle. 

274 That is, the divine or higher sense, connected with memory in its beginnings and with the Platonic “reminiscence” 
(the Pythagorean mathesis) in its maturity. 

275 Cf. C. H, x. (xi.) 19. 

276 That is, Cosmos. 


- 238 - 



For where is aught [of it] discerned by measurement of 
times, - wherein are seen untruths, and births [-and- 
deaths], and errors? 

4. Thou seest, then, Asclepius, on what we are [already] 
founded, with what we occupy ourselves, and after what 
we dare to strive. 

But unto Thee, O God most high, I give my thanks, in 
that Thou hast enlightened me with Light to see Divinity! 

And ye, O Tat, Asclepius and Ammon, in silence hide the 
mysteries divine within the secret places of your hearts 277 , 
and breathe no word of their concealment! 278 

5. Now in our case the intellect doth differ from the sense 
in this, - that by the mind’s extension intellect can reach to 
the intelligence and the discernment of the quality of 
Cosmic Sense. 

The Intellect of Cosmos, on the other hand, extends to 
the Eternity and to the Gnosis of the Gods who are above 
itself 279 . 

And thus it comes to pass for men, that we perceive the 
things in Heaven, as it were through a mist, as far as the 
condition of the human sense allows. 

’Tis true that the extension [of the mind] which we 
possess for the survey of such transcendent things, is very 
narrow [still]; but [it will be] most ample when it shall 
perceive with the felicity of [true] self-consciousness. 

XXXIII 

1. [XII. M.] Now on the subject of a “Void,” 280 - which 
seems to almost all a thing of vast importance, - 1 hold the 
following view. 

Naught is, naught could have been, naught ever will be 
void. 


277 Lit. breasts. 

278 Cf C. H, xiii. (xiv.) 22. 

279 The super-cosmic Gods, or beings of the Intelligible Cosmos; the iEons of the Gnostics. 

280 Cf C. H, xi. (xii.) . 


- 239 - 



For all the members of the Cosmos are completely full; so 
that Cosmos itself is full and [quite] complete with bodies, 
diverse in quality and form, possessing each its proper 
kind and size. 

And of these bodies - one’s greater than another, or 
another’s less than is another, by difference of strength 
and size. 

Of course, the stronger of them are more easily perceived, 
just as the larger [are]. The lesser ones, however, or the 
more minute, can scarcely be perceived, or not at all - 
those which we know are things [at all] by sense of touch 
alone. 

Whence many come to think they are not bodies, and that 
there are void spaces, - which is impossible. 

2. So also [for the Space] which is called Extra-cosmic, - if 
there be any (which I do not believe), - [then] is it filled by 
Him with things Intelligible, that is things of like nature 
with His own Divinity; just as this Cosmos which is called 
the Sensible, is fully filled with bodies and with animals, 
consonant with its proper nature and its quality; - [bodies] 
the proper shape of which we do not all behold, but [see] 
some large beyond their proper measure, some very small; 
either because of the great space which lies between [them 
and ourselves], or else because our sight is dull; so that 
they seem to us to be minute, or by the multitude are 
thought not to exist at all, because of their too great 
tenuity. 

I mean the daimones, who, I believe, have their abode 
with us, and heroes, who abide between the purest part of 
air above us and the earth, - where it is ever cloudless, and 
no [movement from the] motion of a single star [disturbs 
the peace]. 

3. Because of this, Asclepius, thou shalt call nothing void; 
unless thou wilt declare of what that’s void, which thou 
dost say is void; - for instance, void of fire, of water, or 
things like to these. 


- 240 - 



For if it should fall out, that it should seem that anything 
is able to be void of things like these, - though that which 
seemeth void be little or be big, it still cannot be void of 
spirit and of air. 

XXXIV 

1. In like way must we also talk concerning “Space,” 281 - a 
term which by itself is void of “sense.” 282 

For Space seems what it is from that of which it is [the 
space]. For if the qualifying 28 ’ word is cut away, the sense 
is maimed. 

Wherefore we shall [more] righdy say the space of water, 
space of fire, or [space] of things like these. 

For as it is impossible that aught be void; so is Space also 
in itself not possible to be distinguished what it is. 

For if you postulate a space without that [thing] of which 
it is [the space], it will appear to be void space, - which I 
do not believe exists in Cosmos. 

2. If nothing, then, is void, so also Space by its own self 
does not show what it is unless you add to it lengths, 
breadths [and depths], - just as you add the proper 
marks 284 unto men’s bodies. 

These things, then, being thus, Asclepius, and ye who are 
with [him], - know the Intelligible Cosmos (that is, [the 
one] which is discerned by contemplation of the mind 
alone) is bodiless; nor can aught corporal be mingled with 
its nature, - [by corporal I mean] what can be known by 
quality, by quantity, and numbers. For there is nothing of 
this kind in that. 

3. This Cosmos, then, which is called Sensible, is the 
receptacle of all things sensible, - of species, qualities, or 
bodies. 


281 Cf. xv. 1 above. 

282 Intellect u caret. 

283 Principale, — lit. principal. 

284 Signa\ characteristics, presumably. 


-241 - 



But not a single one of these can quicken without God. 
For God is all, and by Him [are] all things, and all [are] of 
His Will. 

For that He is all Goodness, Fitness, Wisdom, 
unchangeable, - that can be sensed and understood by His 
own self alone. 

Without Him naught hath been, nor is, nor will be. 

4. For all things are from Him, in Him, and through Him, 
- both multitudinous qualities, and mighty quantities, and 
magnitudes exceeding every means of measurement, and 
species of all forms; - which things, if thou should’st 
understand, Asclepius, thou wilt give thanks to God. 

And if thou should’st observe it 283 as a whole, thou wilt be 
taught, by means of the True Reason, that Cosmos in 
itself is knowable to sense 286 , and that all things in it are 
wrapped as in a vesture by that Higher Cosmos 287 [spoken 
of above] . 

XXXV 

1. Now every single class of living thing 288 , Asclepius, of 
whatsoever kind, or it be mortal or be rational, whether it 
be endowed with soul, or be without one, just as each has 
its class 289 , so does each several [class] have images of its 
own class. 

And though each separate class of animal has in it every 
form of its own class, still in the selfsame [kind of] form 
the units differ from each other. 

And so although the class of men is of one kind, so that a 
man can be distinguished by his [general] look, still 
individual men within the sameness of their [common] 
form do differ from each other. 


285 Sc. the Cosmos. 

286 Sensibilew, probably referring to the sensns par excellence ; that is, the higher or cosmic sense. 

287 That is, the Intelligible Cosmos; presumably the iEon. 

288 Animalium. 

289 Genus. 


- 242 - 



2. For the idea 2911 which is divine, is bodiless, and is 
whatever is grasped by the mind. 

So that although these two 291 , from which the general 
form and body are derived, are bodiless, it is impossible 
that any single form should be produced exacdy like 
another, - because the moments of the hours and points 
of inclination [when they’re born] are different. 

But they are changed as many times as there are moments 
in the hour of that revolving Circle in which abides that 
God whom we have called All-formed 292 . 

3. The species 29 ’, then, persists, as frequently producing 
from itself as many images, and as diverse, as there are 
moments in the Cosmic Revolution 294 , - a Cosmos which 
doth [ever] change in revolution. But the idea 29 ’ [itself] is 
neither changed nor turned. 

So are the forms of every single genus permanent, [and 
yet] dissimilar in the same [general] form. 

XXXVI 

1. Asc. And does the Cosmos have a species, O Thrice- 
greatest one? 

Tris. Dost not thou see, Asclepius, that all has been 
explained to thee as though to one asleep? 

For what is Cosmos, or of what doth it consist, if not of 
all things born? 

This 296 , then, you may assert of heaven, and earth, and 
elements. For though the other things possess more 
frequent change of species, [still even] heaven, [by its] 
becoming moist, or dry, or cold, or hot, or clear, or dull, 


290 Species', meaning here apparently the genus or class. 

291 Apparently the idea and mind. 

292 Cf. C. H., xi. (xii.) 16; and C. H., xvi. 15; also xix. 3 above, and xxxvi. 2 below. 

293 That is, apparently, the “divine species,” or idea, the genus. 

294 Cf. xl. 3 below. 

295 Species. 

296 That is, that there are genera embracing many species. 


- 243 - 



[all] in one kind 297 of heaven, - these [too] are frequent 
changes into species 298 . 

2. Earth hath, moreover, always many changes in its 
species; - both when she brings forth fruits, and when she 
also nourishes her bringings -forth with the return of all 
the fruits; the diverse qualities and quantities of air, its 
stoppings and its flowings 299 ; and before all the qualities of 
trees, of flowers, and berries, of scents, of savours - 
species. 

Fire [also] brings about most numerous conversions, and 
divine. For these are all-formed images of Sun and 
Moon 300 ; they’re, as it were, like our own mirrors, which 
with their emulous resplendence give us back the 
likenesses of our own images. 

1. [XIII. M.] But 301 now let this suffice about such things; 
and let us once again return to man and reason, - gift 
divine, from which man has the name of rational animal. 

Fess to be wondered at are the things said of man, - 
though they are [still] to be admired. Nay, of all marvels 
that which wins our wonder [most] is that man has been 
able to find out the nature of the Gods and bring it into 
play. 

2. Since, then, our earliest progenitors were in great 
error’" 2 , - seeing they had no rational faith about the 
Gods, and that they paid no heed unto their cult and holy 
worship, - they chanced upon an art whereby they made 
Gods [for themselves] 

To this invention they conjoined a power that suited it, 
[derived] from cosmic nature; and blending these together, 
since souls they could not make, [they set about] evoking 


297 Specie. 

298 The construction is here confuted and elliptical. 

299 This clause seems to be out of place. 

300 Presumably of the ideal Sun and Moon; for “all-formed,” cf. xxxv. 2 above. 

301 The first six paragraphs of this chapter are quoted in Latin, with two slight verbal variants, by Augustine, De 
Civitate Dei, xxiv., xxvi. 

302 Menard thinks he can distinguish the hand of a Christian scribe in this sentence, which he translates with great 
freedom, “ qui s’egaraient dans I’incredulite.” A more careful translation, however, does not seem to favour this 
hypothesis. Hermes says simply that primitive mankind were ignorant of the Gods, and so in error. 

303 That is, images. Cf. xxx. above; and C. H., xvii. 


- 244 - 



daimons’ souls or those of angels; [and thus] attached 
them to their sacred images and holy mysteries, so that the 
statues should, by means of these, possess the powers of 
doing good and the reverse. 

3. For thy forebear, Asclepius, the first discoverer of 
medicine, to whom there is a temple hallowed on Libya’s 
Mount’ 114 , hard by the shore of crocodiles’ 11 ’, in which his 
cosmic man’ 116 reposes, that is to say his body; for that the 
rest [of him], or better still, the whole (if that a man when 
wholly [plunged] in consciousness of life’ 117 , be better), 
hath gone back home to heaven, - still furnishing, [but] 
now by his divinity, the sick with all the remedies which 
he was wont in days gone by to give by art of medicine. 

4. Hermes, which is the name of my forebear, whose 
home is in a place called after him ’ 08 , doth aid and guard 
all mortal [men] who come to him from every side’ 09 . 

As for Osiris’ [spouse]; how many are the blessings that 
we know Isis bestows when she’s propitious; how many 
does she injure when she’s wrath! 

For that the terrene and the cosmic Gods are easily 
enraged, in that they are created and composed of the two 
natures. 

5. And for this cause it comes to pass that these are called 
the “sacred animals” by the Egyptians, and that each 
several state’ 10 gives service to the souls of those whose 
souls have been made holy ’ 11 , while they were still alive; so 
that [the several states] are governed by the laws [of their 
peculiar sacred animals], and called after their names. 


304 Cf. xxvii. 3 above. 

305 In monte Libya circa littns crocodilorum. Does this refer to a Crocodilopolis (xgoxoSelXwv noXv;, Ptol., iv. 5, § 65)? And 
if so, to which of these cities, for there were several? The best known of these is Arsinoe in the Faiyyum; but there 
was also another down south, in the Thebaid, on the W. bank of the Nile, lat. 25° 6', of which remains are still visible 
at Embeshanda, on the verge of the Libyan desert. See Smith’s Diet, of Gk. and Rom. Geography (London, 1878), sub voc. 

306 Presumably his mummy. 

307 In sensu vitce. 

308 Hermopolis therefore (compare Lact., D. Institt, i. 6); that is to say, Hermopolis Magna (Eggon noX ig psYakr]), the 
modem Eshmun, on the left bank of the Nile, about lat. 27° 4'. 

309 To get wisdom. Augustine’s quotation ends here. 

310 Or city. For the animal cult of the Egyptians, see Plutarch, De Is. et Os., lxxii. ff. 

311 Or consecrated. 


- 245 - 



It is because of this, Asclepius, those [animals] which are 
considered by some states deserving of their worship, in 
others are thought otherwise; and on account of this the 
states of the Egyptians wage with each other frequent war. 

XXXVIII 

1. Asc. And of what nature, O Thrice-greatest one, may be 
the quality of those who are considered terrene Gods? 

Tris. It doth consist, Asclepius, of plants, and stones, and 
spices, which contain the nature of [their own] divinity. 

And for this cause they are delighted with repeated 
sacrifice, with hymns, and lauds, and sweetest sounds, 
tuned to the key of Heaven’s harmonious song’ 12 . 

2. So that what is of heavenly nature ’ 1 ’, being drawn down 
into the images by means of heavenly use and practices, 
may be enabled to endure with joy the nature of mankind, 
and sojourn with it for long periods of time. 

Thus is it that man is the maker of the Gods. 

3. But do not, O Asclepius, I pray thee, think the doings 
of the terrene Gods are the result of chance. 

The heavenly Gods dwell in the heights of Heaven, each 
fil li ng up and watching o’er the rank he hath received; 
whereas these Gods of ours’ 14 , each in its way, - by 
looking after certain things, foretelling others by oracles 
and prophecy, foreseeing others, and duly helping them 
along, - act as allies of men, as though they were our 
relatives and friends. 


XXXIX 

1. [XIV. M.] Asc. What part of the economy 315 , Thrice- 
greatest one, does the Heimarmene, or Fate, then occupy? 
For do not the celestial Gods rule over generals’ 16 ; the 
terrene occupy particulars? 


312 Cf. “God’s song” in xiii. 2 above. 

313 Namely, the nature of the Gods. 

314 The terrene Gods; the daimones of C. H., xvi. 14. 

315 f lationis-, lit. reason. 

316 Catholicomni. 


- 246 - 



Tot. That which we call Heimarmene, Asclepius, is the 
necessity of all things that are born 117 , bound ever to 
themselves with interlinked enchainments. 

This, then, is either the effector of all things, or it is 
highest God, or what is made the second God by God 
Himself, - or else the discipline’ 18 of all things both in 
heaven and on earth, established by the laws of the 
Divine. 

2. And so these twain, Fate and Necessity, are bound to 
one another mutually by inseparable cohesion’ 19 . 

The former of them, the Heimarmene, gives birth to the 
beginnings of all things; Necessity compels the end of [all] 
depending from these principals. 

On these doth Order follow, that is their warp-and-woof, 
and Time’s arrangement for the perfecting of [all] things. 
For there is naught without the interblend of Order ’ 20 . 

That Cosmos’ 21 is made perfect in all things; for Cosmos’ 
self is vehicled ’ 22 in Order, or totally consists of Order. 

XL 

1. So, then, these three, Fate, [and] Necessity, [and] Order, 
are most immediately effected by God’s Will, who rules 
the Cosmos by His Law and by His Holy Reason. 

From these, accordingly, all willing or not-willing is 
altogether foreign, according to God’s Will’ 2 ’. 

They are not moved by wrath nor swayed by favour, but 
are the instruments of the Eternal Reason’s self- 


317 Or borne, qua geruntur. 

318 Disciplina = ? gnosis. 

319 Glutino. 

320 Cf. J. Laurentius Lydus, De Mensibus, iv. 7 (Wiinsch, 70); the rest of the quotation following on what has been 
already quoted in the note to xix. 3. The Greek is either a very much shortened form or the Latin a very much 
expanded one, for the former may be translated as follows: “And Fate is also fated Activity (or Energy), or God 
Himself, or the Order that doth follow that Activity set over all things in the heaven and all things on the earth, 
together with Necessity. The former (Fate) gives birth to the very beginnings of things, the latter compels the ends 
also to come into existence. And on them there follow Order and Law, and there is naught that’s orderless.” Cf. Ex. 
i. 15, and Ex. xi. 1. 

321 Mundus = cosmos, meaning also order in Greek. 

322 Gestatnr. 

323 Divinitus. 


-247 - 



compulsion, which is [the Reason] of Eternity 124 , that 
never can be turned aside, or changed, or be destroyed. 

2. First, then, is Fate, which, as it were, by casting in the 
seed, supplies the embryo of all that are to be. 

Follows Necessity, whereby they all are forcibly compelled 
unto their end. 

Third, Order [comes], preserving warp-and-wooF 2 ' of [all] 
the things which Fate and [which] Necessity arrange 126 . 

This, then, is the Eternity, which neither doth begin nor 
cease to be, which, fixed by law unchangeable, abides in 
the unceasing motion of its course. 

3. It rises and it sets, by turns, throughout its limbs 127 ; so 
that by reason of Time’s changes it often rises with the 
very limbs with which it [once] had set. 

For [its] sphericity, - its law of revolution 128 , - is of this 
nature, that all things are so straightly joined to their own 
selves, that no one knoweth what is the beginning of their 
revolution 129 ; since they appear for ever all to go before 
and follow after their own selves. 

Good and bad issues 110 , [therefore,] are commingled in all 
cosmic things. 

4. [XV. M.] And now it hath been told you on each 
several point, - as man hath power [to tell], and God hath 
willed it and permitted it. 

This, then, alone remains that we should do, - bless God 
and give Him praise; and so return to taking thought for 
body [’s comfort]. 

For now sufficiently have we been filled with feast of 
mind by our discourse on sacred things 111 . 


324 That is, the iEon. 

325 [Ed. i.e. the fundamental structure or fabric.] 

326 Fate thus seems to be regarded as the Creator, Order as the Preserver, and Necessity as the Destroyer or 
Regenerator. 

327 Membra-, that is, parts, presumably constellations. 

328 Cf. xxxv. 3 below. 

329 Vt olubilitatis-, that is, their turning into themselves; the symbol of which was the serpent swallowing its tail. 

330 Eventus et fors. 

331 Cf. the conclusion of C. H., xvii. 


- 248 - 



XLI 


1. Now when they came forth from the holy place” 2 , they 
turned their faces towards the south 111 when they began 
their prayers to God. 

For when the sun is setting, should anyone desire to pray 
to God, he ought to turn him thitherwards 114 ; so also at 
the rising of the same, unto that spot which lies beneath 
the sun -1-15 . 

As they were just beginning to recite the prayer, Asclepius 
did whisper: 

[Asc.] Let us suggest to father, Tat, - what he did bid us 
do 336 , - that we should say our prayer to God with added 
incense and with unguents. 

Whom when Thrice-greatest heard, he grew distressed 
and said: 

2. [Tris.] Nay, nay, Asclepius; speak more propitious 
words! For this is like to profanation of [our] sacred rites, 
- when thou dost pray to God, to offer incense and the 
rest. 

For naught is there of which He stands in need, in that He 
is all things, or all are in Him. 

But let us worship, pouring forth our thanks. For this is 
the best incense in God’s sight, - when thanks are given to 
Him by men 117 . 

3. [We give] Thee grace, Thou highest [and] most 
excellent! For by Thy Grace we have received the so great 
Light of Thy own Gnosis. 

O holy Name, fit [Name] to be adored, O Name unique, 
by which the Only God 118 is to be blest through worship 
of [our] Sire, - [of Thee] who deignest to afford to all a 
Father’s piety, and care, and love, and whatsoever virtue is 


332 De adjto ; “down from,” literally. 

333 This is apparently an error for south-west or west. 

334 That is, to the setting sun or the west. Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 16, Comment. 

335 Subsolanus , lying beneath the sun; that is to say, eastern. 

336 Cf. xxxviii. 1 above. 

337 For the three preceding paragraphs, see Lact., D. /., vi. 25. 

338 The Cosmos, presumably, as the One God. 


- 249 - 



more sweet [than these], endowing [us] with sense, [and] 
reason, [and] intelligence; - with sense that we may feel 
Thee; with reason that we may track Thee out from the 
appearances of things 1 ’ 9 ; with means of recognition that 
we may joy in knowing Thee. 

4. Saved by Thy Power divine, let us rejoice that Thou 
hast shown Thyself to us in all Thy Fullness. Let us rejoice 
that Thou hast deigned to consecrate us, [still] entombed 
in bodies, to Eternity. 

For this is the sole festival of praise worthy of man, - to 
know Thy Majesty. 

We have known Thee; yea, by the Single Sense of our 
intelligence, we have perceived Thy Light supreme, - O 
Thou true Life of life, O Fecund Womb that giveth birth 
to every nature! 

5. We have known Thee, O Thou completely filled with 
the Conception from Thyself of Universal Nature! 

We have known Thee, O Thou Eternal Constancy! 

For in the whole of this our prayer in worship of Thy 
Good, this favour only of Thy Goodness do we crave; - 
that Thou wilt keep us constant in our Love of knowing 
Thee ’ 411 , and let us ne’er be cut off from this kind of Life. 

With this desire we [now] betake us to [our] pure and 
fleshless meal’ 41 . 



339 Suspicionibus ; hints, perhaps, and so phenomena. 

340 Or of Thy Gnosis. 

341 Ccenam. 


- 250 - 



COMMENTARY 


THE TITLE 

The titles in the Latin MSS. vary. The heading preferred by Hildebrand is 
“Asclepius, or a Dialogue of Thrice-greatest Hermes”; while in the Bipontine 
edition, the title stands: “Thrice-greatest Hermes Concerning the Nature of the 
Gods; A Sermon addressed to Asclepius.” Menard, the French translator, prefers: 
“A Sermon of Initiation, or Asclepius.” 

The treatise begins with a transparent gloss, in all probability originally the 
marginal note of some scribe, or student, which has improperly crept into the text. 
It runs: “This Asclepius is my Sun-god”; that is to say, apparently: “This Sermon 
‘Asclepius’ has illumined me”; from which it is evident that the title lying before the 
scribe was “Asclepius” simply, as may be seen from § 2: “It is, however, with thy 
name I will inscribe this treatise.” Stobseus, moreover, in quoting from the original 
Greek (of xxvii. 4), heads his extract simply, “Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to 
Asclepius.” 

On the other hand, the Church Father Lactantius, writing at the beginning of the 
fourth century, and quoting from the Greek original, says twice, categorically (D. I., 
iv. 6 and vii. 8): “Hermes in illo libro qui \6yoq xeXeioq inscribituH \ that is, “Hermes in 
the Book entitled ‘The Perfect Sermon,’ or ‘The Sermon of Initiation’”; while 
Johannes Laurentius Lydus on three occasions quotes from this “Perfect Sermon” 
of Hermes, and on each occasion so names it. 

I have accordingly preferred this as the main title, and added “The Asclepius” as 
an alternative. 

THE OLD LATIN TRANSLATION AND THE GREEK ORIGINAL 

Of the Greek original we have quotations or references by Lactantius (see viii. 1 
and 3; xxv. 4: xxvi. 1; xli. 2), Johannes Laurentius Lydus (see xix. 3; xxviii. 1; xxxix. 
1, 2), and Stobasus (see xxvii. 4). 

If we compare these Greek quotations with our Latin translation, we shall find, 
not only that the Latin is an exceedingly free rendering of the Greek, showing many 
expansions and contractions, and often missing the sense of the original, but also 
that even in Greek there were probably several recensions of the same text 342 . 

Indeed, the free rendering of our translation is of such a nature that it is 
impossible to base upon it any certain conclusions as to the date of the original or 
its precise worth in the history of religion ’ 4 ’. 

That, however, our Latin translation is an ancient one is proved by Augustine’s 
verbal quotations from it (see xxiii. 1; xxiii. 3-xxiv. 2; xxiv. 3; xxvii. 1-4). It was thus 
in existence about 400 A.D. at least 344 . 


342 See R. 195, 2. 

343 The so-founded opinions of Bemays and Zeller are characterized by Reitzenstein (p. 195) as of as little value as 
the opinions which made the whole of our literature dependent on New Platonism. 

344 Augustine’s date is 354-430 A.D. 


-251 - 



Tradition, however, has assigned to it a far higher antiquity, attributing it to no 
less distinguished a writer than Appuleius, and so referring it to the first half of the 
second century. 

This attribution has, of course, for long been questioned by modern criticism, 
and Reitzenstein, though he does not discuss the subject, accepts the adverse 
verdict and refers us to a “Pseudo-Appuleius.” 

Hildebrand, whose minute acquaintance with Appuleius’ peculiar style and 
neologisms is a guarantee of his competence, has thoroughly gone into the matter; 
and though he sums up against tradition, it is in a half-hearted way. The translation, 
if not by Appuleius, is at any rate in old African Latin, and there is nothing in the 
style which absolutely forbids the possibility of its being by the author of The Golden 
Ass and the initiate of Isis. The strongest point, other than philological, against 
tradition is that Augustine does not say the translation was by Appuleius; but this 
seems to me to be unworthy of serious consideration. 

It is, of course, difficult to turn possibilities into probabilities, but I see no 
reason why the Greek original of our Sermon should not be assigned to the earlier 
Hermes-Asclepian dialogues as well as to any others. That it was one of the most 
famous is evident by its wide quotation, and by the fact that several recensions of 
the Greek text were in circulation. 

OF THE WRITER AND THE PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE 

The Latin translator retains a number of the original Greek technical terms, and 
if we could only rely on his translation giving us the substance of the original in all 
cases, we should be presented in several passages with phenomena which would 
persuade us that the writer of the original intended his readers to think he was an 
Egyptian, and that his native nomenclature was other than Greek, as is also the case 
in C. H. (xvi.). 

For instance, in vii. 2, “the man ‘essential,” 45 as say the Greeks,” - but this may 
be a gloss of the Latin translator. 

Again, in x. 2: “So that . . . ‘World’ seems most fitly called ‘Cosmos’ in Greek,” - 
which seems to be the original. 

Yet again, the “multifarious reasoning” of xii. 3 reminds us strongly of “the 
philosophizing of the Greeks - the noise of words,” in C. H., xvi. 2. 

On the other hand, the phrase, “which we in Greek {grace ) believe to be the 
Cosmos,” would seem to make the original author forget his Egyptian role. 

While “its bottom ... is called in Greek A-eides,” coupled with “in Greek they 
are called Hades ... in Latin Infer?’ (xvii. 3), may be assigned to a gloss of the 
translator. 

In xxiv. 1 , however, the sentence, “Dost thou not know, Asclepius, that Egypt is 
the image of the Heaven? . . . This land of ours is shrine of the whole world” - 
coupled with the rest of the chapter, and Ch. xxv. - could hardly have been written 
by a Greek. In xxviii. 1, moreover, the “weighing of the merit” of the soul is 
strongly Egyptian, and so with the image and animal-cult. 


345 Cf. C. H, xiii. (xiv.) 14. 


- 252 - 



As to the persons of the dialogue, I would suggest that originally the sermon was 
addressed to Asclepius alone, and that the slight narrative indications were added 
later to adapt it to wider circles. 

The chief disciple is evidently Asclepius; he it is who is already “well versed in 
Nature,” according to C. H., xiv. (xv.) 1; that is to say, he has progressed beyond 
the stage of Hearer, for he questions Hermes, whereas Tat does not ask questions, 
but listens only, he is “the one who is to hear” (i. 1). To them is added Ammon on 
the proposal of Asclepius; and Ammon is admitted on the ground that he had 
already had much written to him, but apparently had not yet been admitted to oral 
teaching. 

The teaching is delivered in solemn surroundings in the holy place or shrine (i. 
2), and teacher and pupils constitute the “sacred four.” Hermes teaches in a state of 
exaltation; the place is filled with “God’s goodly presence,” and “Love Divine” 
instructs them, through Hermes’ lips, in answer to the Pure and Single Love of 
Philosophy in their hearts (cf. xii. 3; xiv. 1). 

The same hand that wrote the warning against revealing the sermon to others in 
i. 2 also probably wrote: “And ye, O Tat, Asclepius and Ammon, in silence hide the 
mysteries divine within the secret places of your hearts, and breathe no word of 
their concealment!” (xxxii. 4); he also, presumably, glossed “Asclepius” (xxxiv. 2) 
with “and ye who are with him,” and added the naive whisper of Asclepius to Tat 
(xli. 1). 

This redactor (if our analysis is correct), moreover, was a member of a select’ 46 
ascetic community, judging at any rate by his last sentence (xli. 5); in which case 
Ammon can hardly be equated with any King Ammon, but must be taken as 
standing for some grade of the community. I would suggest that this grade was 
similar to that of the Exoterici of the Pythagoreans or the outer circles of the 
Essenes, of which the members still lived in the world, but received instruction. In 
this case, however, the “we” of the last sentence would have to be taken as 
referring to Asclepius and Tat, and not to Ammon. 

As to the dependence of our sermon on the rest of the literature, I find more 
points of contact between it and C. H., x. (xi.), “The Key” sermon addressed to 
Tat; none of the references, however, which I have given in the notes, show any 
literal dependence. 


THE DOCTRINE OF THE WILL OF GOD 

In the general doctrine the stress laid on the concept of the Will of God’ 4 is to 
be specially noticed. This Will seems to be almost personified, and is, of course, a 
fundamental doctrine of the Trismegistic religio-philosophy 348 . 

In xxvi. 1 it is identified with the Goodness ’ 49 of God, and the Nature of God’ 6 ". 
But what it seems to correspond to most nearly is the fEon or Eternity-idea which 


346 Cf. for references to the “few,” xxii. 1; xxiii. 1; xxxiv. 3; xl. 1. 

347 Cf. vii. 3; viii. 2; xi. 4; xiv. 1; xvi. 3; xix. 4; xx. 3; xxii. 4; xxv. 2; xxvi. 1, 2 and 3. 

348 Cf. especially C. H., iv. (v.) 1; x. (xi.) i. 

349 In the Greek text of Lactantius this is “the Good.” 

350 Cf. vi. 1; xiv. 3. 


- 253 - 



is set forth very clearly in xxx.-xxxii. - in fact, more clearly than anywhere else in the 
Trismegistic literature. God and /Ron are the sources of all things; and /Eon is “the 
Eternity of God, in Truth itself subsisting, the Fullness of all things” (xxxii. 1). The 
Will of God is thus the /Eon or Pleroma, the Wisdom, the Energy, the Spouse of 
the Supreme. 

This Will rules Cosmos with Law and Holy Reason (xl.); Cosmos being the 
Order of things involved in Fate and Necessity the instruments of the Divine 
Will 351 . 

Our sermon is also characterized by the frequent use it makes of the terms Spirit 
and Sense. 


CONCERNING SPIRIT AND THE ALL-SENSE 

The Spirit is evidendy Cosmic Life (vi. 4; xxvii. 1) and individual life (x. 4) 352 . The 
exposition of it begins with xiv. 2; Spirit and Matter, or the Nature of the Cosmos 
(xiv. 3), are practically regarded as the Positive and Negative, or Masculine and 
Feminine Energies of the Divine. 

Spirit is the Ruler (xvii. 1) of all tilings in Cosmos or Nature; it is the immediate 
Instrument of the Will of God (xvi. 3); and is, indeed, loosely identified with that 
Will (xix. 4); while in still looser fashion Spirit seems to be symbolized by “Heaven” 
and the Sensible Cosmos by “Earth” (xix. 2). 

It is very probable that this doctrine of Spirit as Divine Breath is fundamentally 
Egyptian, and owes nothing to immediate Semitic influence. However this may be, 
the use of the term Sense, as apparently in some way superior to Reason (vi. 4; x. 
4), is very striking, and, as in some cases opposed to the exaltation of the Reason 
found elsewhere in our tractates, under the influence of this leading idea of Greek 
philosophy, discloses an Egyptian point of view. 

We have already noticed this use of the term in some of our tractates, but in our 
present sermon it is brought into great prominence. This Sense is not the 
differentiated senses, but a Unit or Cosmic Sense. 

It is “the Divine Sense of intelligence,” and is found only in God and in man’s 
reason (vii. 1; xxxii. 2). 

It is the “Higher Sense (with which Celestial Gift mankind alone is blest)” - 
characterized as the “feeder of the mind” (xviii. 1); yet on the other hand this 
“Higher Sense” is that “which by good chance a man perceives by mind, when out 
of all his senses.” 

This Sense is in some fashion closely connected with Nature and Cosmos (xxi. 
1); through it man “disciplines his soul,” and “cures his intellect,” thus gaining 
“intelligence of God-like Reason” (xxii. 1), and finally “mingling himself with the 
All-sense of the Divine Intelligence” (xxix. 2). 

This All-sense is the same as the “Whole Sense of Divinity,” and is the Likeness 
of God; it is “in its own self immoveable,” and yet “doth set itself in motion within 
its own stability” (xxxii. 1). Man must make himself like unto this Likeness. 


351 Cf. also C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 19, 20, and R. 39, n. 1. 

352 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 13, and Commentary. 


- 254 - 



This Likeness is evidently the /Ron or Intelligible Cosmos; for the “Cosmic 
Sense is the Container of all sensibles” (xxxii. 2). 

In man its chief normal characteristic is the retentiveness of memory, “through 
which man is made ruler of the Earth” (xxxii. 2). This Sense is then man’s 
continuum , the germ of everlastingness in him, the root-ground of consciousness 
(xxxii. 3), the Single Sense of the intelligence (xli. 4), which is fully brought to birth 
only when a man “is wholly plunged in consciousness of life (in sensu vita:)" (xxxvii. 
3), - the “spiritual life” of the Christian Gnostics. 

The fact that we have only a translation to deal with prevents us laying too much 
stress on details, but the general idea is clear enough; so too with the rest of this, 
the longest of our sermons, we must be content to refer only to general points, the 
chief of which are the “prophetic” utterances. 

THE PROPHETIC UTTERANCES 

These present us with problems of very great difficulty, and, so far, I have 
neither seen any solution nor has any occurred to me. 

So much work has been done on contemporary prophetic utterances of this 
nature, especially on the Sibylline Literature, that it may be said that the scholastic 
mind has reached certain general criteria with regard to such pronouncements - the 
chief of which is that the hypothesis of genuine prophecy is not to be entertained. 

In the Sibylline literature, indeed, this is clearly established; for much of it 
consists of traditional history written in the prophetical tense, so to say; when the 
history comes to an end the date of the “prophetical” writer is at once detected, for 
all that follows has no longer any relation to historical events. 

In the case of our “prophecies,” however, we have nothing of this nature to 
guide us. All we can say is that they seem to have been written, most probably, at a 
time when the Trismegistic communities were being persecuted. 

That this was in the course of the fourth century, however, as Reitzenstein (p. 
213) supposes, seems to me to be, so far, destitute of any sure objective 
confirmation; it not only compels us to suppose that the prophecies are later 
interpolations (which they may possibly be), but that these interpolations are later 
than Lactantius; whereas there is every probability that the Church Father had the 
text of them before him 333 , and his date is the beginning of the fourth century. 

On the other hand, Zosimus, writing somewhere about the end of the third and 
beginning of the fourth century, breathes no word of persecution, and leads us to 
suppose that the community was still flourishing. We are thus still in the gravest 
uncertainty. 

The first of our “prophecies” is in xii. 3: “For I will tell thee as though it were 
propheticly” - addressed to Asclepius, and, therefore, probably not due to the 
redactor who we have supposed added the narrative sentences. 

The lament of the writer is that “the Single Love, die Love of Pure Philosophy,” 
is fast disappearing from the world; he can hardly have had Christianity in mind 
when writing these words, for he contrasts the “Pure Philosophy” with 


353 See xxv. 4, and note. 


- 255 - 



“multifarious reasoning” and “divers sciences,” and the latter can hardly be said to 
be characteristic of General Christianity. 

If, however, his words may be said to include also Gnostic Christianity, then he 
was clearly not in sympathy with it; but this can hardly be the case, seeing that the 
resemblances between the Trismegistic and Christian Gnosis are of a very intimate 
nature. 


THE PROSCRIPTION OF THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 

Turning next to xxiv. 2, we meet with the clear statement that the worship of the 
Gods will be legally proscribed by the “barbarian” masters of Egypt (also xxv. 3). 

Such a general proscription in this emphatic sense took place in Egypt only with 
the destruction of the Serapeum by the Christians themselves in 389 A.D. Of 
persecutions of the Christians by the Roman authorities in Egypt prior to this we 
get clear indications in the writings of the Christian Gnostic Basilides, who 
flourished at Alexandria at the beginning of the second century, and wrote specially 
of martyrdom. But this will little help us for the proscription of a cult that favoured 
the worship of the Gods and of their images. 

Can it, then, be possible that these prophetic utterances were written at a time 
when many of the same nature were being penned by Jew and Christian? For our 
author, as for Jewish and Christian writers, the “End of the World” was at hand; 
his expectation is in this precisely the same as that of the writers of the New 
Testament documents. 

The cause of this dire event is that Egypt, the “shrine of the whole world,” the 
“Holy Land ” ^ par excellence , will be polluted with all iniquity and violence. The Cult 
of the Gods will cease, and the Gods will leave the Earth and mount to Heaven. 
The man’s whole heart is bleeding for Egypt, even as the heart of a Jew for 
Jerusalem. 

If there is any immediate historical references in these heartfelt utterances, we 
must seek them in such phrases as: “This holiest land, seat of our shrines and 
temples, shall be choked with tombs and corpses” (xxiv. 3); “the tale of tombs shall 
far exceed the number of the quick” {ibid., § 4) 355 ; and “Egypt shall be made the 
home of Scyth or Indian, or someone like to them - that is, a foreign neighbour.” 

It is true that the Christians were ever reproached with worshipping the dead, 
and building churches over the bones of the dead - an act of utter pollution 
according to all Pagan notions; but the words of our author, even allowing for all 
hyperbole, can hardly be construed in this sense. 

People like Scyths or Indians, again, if we are to suppose any historical reference, 
can hardly be imagined to refer to the Romans; while the Goths under Alaric, who 
ravaged Greece in 395, 396 A.D., are too late even for Reitzenstein. Moreover, we 
have already in our notes pointed to the strange conjunction of Scyth and 
Barbarian in our text as being also found in Colossians. 


354 The “image of the Heaven”; cf. K. K., 46-48. 

355 This is very different language from the more moderate tone of C. H., ix. (x.) 4, where we are told about the 
Gnostics, “they are thought mad and laughed at; they’re hated and despised, and sometimes even put to death.” 


- 256 - 



On the other hand, nothing but the entire State suppression of the Pagan 
Religion in all its forms can satisfy xxv. 3, and this just suits the end of the fourth 
century. 

If, however, we cannot entertain so late a date, and I do not think we can, there 
seems nothing for it but to give the writer some credit for his prognostication of 
the future; for eventually things certainly turned out for him and all he held most 
dear very much as he imagined or feared they would. 

THE LAST HOPE OF THE RELIGION OF THE MIND 

At any rate the last hope of the Pure Love, the Religion of the Mind, is in the 
Trismegistic Communities, if indeed it is so permitted to interpret xxvii. 3: 

“Yea, they who rule the earth shall be distributed [through all the lands], and 
finally be gathered in a state, - at top of Egypt’s upper part, - which shall be founded 
towards the setting sun, and to which all the mortal race shall speed. ” 

We need not insist upon details, for our translator may have gone wide of the 
original; for instance, the “race” may, instead of being “mortal” in the original, have 
been the “Race” of which we have already heard so much in Philo and these 
tractates; but the similarity of the idea cannot fail to remind us of Philo when, in 
writing of the Redeemed of Spiritual Israel, he says: 

“Those who were but scattered in Hellas and non -Grecian (Barbarian) lands, over 
islands and over continents, shall rise up with one impulse, and from diverse regions 
flock together unto the one spot revealed to them. ” 356 

And with this further compare the famous passage on the Therapeuts: 

“Now this Race of men is to be found in many parts of the inhabited world, both 
the Grecian and non-Grecian world, sharing in the Pefect Good. 

“In Egypt there are crowds of them in every province, or nome as they call it, and 
especially round Alexandria. For they who are in every way (or in every nome) the 
most highly advanced, come as colonists 357 , as it were, to the Therapeutic 
fatherland. ” 35S 

Moreover, just as the Therapeuts in the immediately following lines of Philo are 
said to have their community on a hill, so too in our text we immediately find 
mention of the Trismegistic communities as having their chief centre on the Libyan 
Hill, - a community which is spoken of as “very large” in numbers, and so is 
somewhat of a contradiction to the numbers of the Pious given in xxii. 1 , where we 


356 De Execrat., § 9; M. ii. 435, 436; P. 937 (Ri. v. 255). 

357 Cf. in our Sermon, xxv. 1: Egypt, “the sole colony of holiness.” 

358 D. V. C, C. 56 ff; M. i. 474; P. 892. Cf. F. F. F, 69. 


- 257 - 



are told “they may be counted even in the world,” unless the sentence is to be 
taken as rhetorical. 

This Hill is called the Libyan Mount, a vague enough title; nor is this vagueness 
removed when we find it again referred to (in xxxvii. 3) as the place of burial of the 
body of the First Asclepius, and obtain the additional information that it is “hard 
by the shore of crocodiles,” for this can hardly refer to Crocodilopolis in the 
Fayyum, the most northern of the towns so named, seeing that the Libyan Mount 
is “at the top of Egypt’s upper part,” and “towards the setting sun.” 

This, however, corresponds admirably with the location of Philo’s Therapeut 
community on the southern shore of Lake Mareotis, just south of Alexandria; but 
few indeed will be found to entertain the possibility even that Philo and our author 
may be speaking of the same people from different standpoints and under different 
names. 

As far as I can see, there is no certainty in the matter; and, therefore, I leave it as 
a problem of immense interest that has not as yet found a solution. 


- 258 - 



END OF VOLUME II 



- 259 - 





========================================
VOLUME III — EXCERPTS AND FRAGMENTS
========================================

Thrice-Greatest Hermes 

Studies in Hellenistic Theosophy and Gnosis 

Being a Translation of the Extant Sermons and Fragments of the Trismegistic 
Literature, with Prolegomena, Commentaries, and Notes 


Volume III - Excerpts and Fragments 



By 

G. R. S. Mead 


London and Benares 
The Theosophical Publishing Society 
[ 1906 ] 



Contents 


I Excerpts by Stobaeus 6 

EXCERPT I. OF PIETY AND [TRUE] PHILOSOPHY 6 

COMMENTARY 12 

EXCERPT II. [OF THE INEFFAB ILIT Y OF GOD] 12 

COMMENTARY 13 

EXCERPT III. OF TRUTH 13 

COMMENT 17 

EXCERPT IV. [GOD, NATURE AND THE GODS] 18 

COMMENT 19 

EXCERPT V. [OF MATTER] 19 

EXCERPT VI. OF TIME 19 

EXCERPT VII. OF BODIES EVERLASTING [AND BODIES PERISHABLE] 20 

COMMENT 22 

EXCERPT VIII. OF ENERGY AND FEELING 22 

COMMENT 28 

EXCERPT IX. OF [THE DECANS AND] THE STARS 28 

COMMENTARY 34 

EXCERPT X. [CONCERNING THE RULE OF PROVIDENCE, NECESSITY AND 

FATE] 34 

COMMENT 36 

EXCERPT XI. [OF JUSTICE] 36 

COMMENT 37 

EXCERPT XII. OF PROVIDENCE AND FATE 37 

EXCERPT XIII. OF THE WHOLE ECONOMY 38 

EXCERPT XIV. OF SOUL [I.] 39 

EXCERPT XV. [OF SOUL, II.] 40 

COMMENTARY 42 

THE EMBRYONIC STAGES OF INCARNATION 42 

EXCERPT XVI. [OF SOUL, III.] 44 

EXCERPT XVII. [OF SOUL, IV.] 45 

EXCERPT XVIII. [OF SOUL, V.] 46 

COMMENT 48 

EXCERPT XIX. [OF SOUL, VI.] 48 

COMMENT 50 

EXCERPT XX. [THE POWER OF CHOICE] 50 

COMMENT 51 

EXCERPT XXI. OF ISIS TO HORUS 51 

COMMENT 52 

EXCERPT XXII. [AN APOPHTHEGM] 52 

EXCERPT XXIII. FROM “APHRODITE” 52 

COMMENT 53 

EXCERPT XXIV. [A HYMN OF THE GODS] 53 

COMMENT 54 

EXCERPT XXV. THE VIRGIN OF THE WORLD [I.] 54 

EXCERPT XXVI. THE VIRGIN OF THE WORLD [II.] 71 

COMMENTARY 76 

EXCERPT XXVII. FROM THE SERMON OF ISIS TO HORUS 107 

CONCERNING THE INBREATHING AND THE TRANSMIGRATION OF THE SOUL 1 10 

COMMENTARY 115 



II References and Fragments in the Fathers 120 

I. JUSTIN MARTYR 120 

THE MOST ANCIENT OF PHILOSOPHERS 120 

THE “WORDS OF AMMON” 120 

THE INEFF ABILITY OF GOD 121 

HERMES AND ASCLEPIUS SONS OF GOD 121 

HERMES THE WORD WHO BRINGS TIDINGS FROM GOD 122 

THE SONS OF GOD IN HELLENISTIC THEOLOGY 122 

AN UNVERIFI AB LE QUOTATION 122 

II. ATHENAGORAS 123 

III. CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA 123 

MANY HERMESES AND ASCLEPIUSES 123 

THE APOTHEOSIS OF HERMES AND ASCLEPIUS 123 

THE BOOKS OF HERMES 124 

THE GENERAL CATALOGUE OF THE EGYPTIAN PRIESTLY LIBRARY 125 

IV. TERTULLIAN 126 

HERMES THE MASTER OF ALL PHYSICS 126 

HERMES THE WRITER OF SCRIPTURE 126 

HERMES THE FIRST TEACHER OF REINCARNATION 127 

HERMES ON METEMPSYCHOSIS 127 

FRAGMENT 1 127 

V. CYPRIAN 128 

GOD IS BEYOND ALL UNDERSTANDING 128 

VI. ARNOBIUS 128 

THE SCHOOL OF HERMES 128 

VII. LACTANTIUS 129 

THOYTH-HERMES AND HIS BOOKS ON THE GNOSIS 129 

THE HISTORICAL ORIGINS OF THE HERMETIC TRADITION 130 

URANUS. CRONUS AND HERMES, ADEPTS OF THE PERFECT SCIENCE 131 

DIVINE PROVIDENCE 131 

ON MORTAL AND IMMORTAL SIGHT 131 

MAN MADE AFTER THE IMAGE OF GOD 132 

HERMES THE FIRST NATURAL PHILOSOPHER 132 

THE D AIMON -CHIEF 133 

DEVOTION IS GOD-GNOSIS 133 

THE COSMIC SON OF GOD 134 

THE DEMIURGE OF GOD 134 

THE NAME OF GOD 135 

THE HOLY WORD ABOUT THE LORD OF ALL 135 

HIS OWN FATHER AND OWN MOTHER 135 

THE POWER AND GREATNESS OF THE WORD 136 

THE FATHERLESS AND MOTHERLESS 136 

PIETY THE GNOSIS OF GOD 136 

THE ONLY WAY TO WORSHIP GOD 136 

THE WORTHIEST SACRIFICE TO GOD 137 

MAN MADE IN THE IMAGE OF GOD 137 

CONTEMPLATION 137 

THE DUAL NATURE OF MAN 138 

WONDER THE BEGINNING OF PHILOSOPHY 138 

THE COSMIC RESTORATION 138 

OF HERMES AND HIS DOCTRINE CONCERNING GOD 139 

A REPETITION 139 

PLATO AS PROPHET FOLLOWS TRISMEGISTUS 140 



VIII. AUGUSTINE 140 

THREE QUOTATIONS FROM THE OLD LATIN VERSION OF THE “PERFECT SERMON” 140 

IX. CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA 141 

CYRIL’S CORPUS OF XV. BOOKS 141 

THE INCORPOREAL EYE 142 

THE HEAVENLY WORD PROCEEDING FORTH 143 

THE NATURE OF GOD’S INTELLECTUAL WORD 143 

THE WORD OF THE CREATOR 144 

MIND OF MIND 145 

HE IS ALL 145 

CONCERNING SPIRIT 145 

THE “TO ASCLEPIUS” OF CYRIL’S CORPUS 146 

FROM “THE MIND” 147 

OSIRIS AND THRICE-GREATEST AGATHODAIMON 147 

“LET THERE BE EARTH” 148 

THE GENERATION OF THE SUN 148 

“LET THE SUN BE!” 148 

THE FIRMAMENT 149 

FROM THE “TO ASCLEPIUS” 149 

THE SOLE PROTECTION 150 

THE SUPREME ARTIST 150 

AN UNREFERENCED QUOTATION 150 

X. SUIDAS 151 

HERMES SPEAKS OF THE TRINITY 151 

XI. ANONYMOUS 152 

III References and Fragments in the Philosophers 153 

I. ZOSIMUS 153 

ON THE ANTHR0POS-DOCTRINE 153 

THE PROCESSIONS OF FATE 153 

“THE INNER DOOR” 154 

AGAINST MAGIC 154 

FRAGMENT XXVI 154 

THOTH THE FIRST MAN 155 

THE LIBRARIES OF THE PTOLEMIES 155 

NIKOTHEOS 156 

FROM THE BOOK OF THE CHALD7EANS 157 

MAN THE MIND 157 

FRAGMENT XXVII 157 

THE COUNTERFEIT DAIMON 158 

HIS ADVICE TO THEOSEBEIA 159 

II. JAMBLICHUS 160 

AB AMMON THE TEACHER 160 

HERMES THE INSPIRER 160 

THOSE OF THE HERMAIC NATURE 161 

THE BOOKS OF HERMES 162 

THE MONAD FROM THE ONE 163 

THE TRADITION OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 163 

BITYS 165 

OST ANES - AS CLEPIU S 166 

FROM THE HERMAIC WRITINGS 167 

THE COSMIC SPHERES 168 

III. JULIAN THE EMPEROR 170 

THE DISCIPLES OF WISDOM 170 

IV. LULGENTIUS THE MYTHOGRAPHER 171 

FRAGMENT XXVIII 171 



IV Conclusion 172 

AN ATTEMPT AT CLASSIFYING THE EXTANT LITERATURE 172 

TO TAT 173 

TO ASCLEPIUS 174 

TO AMMON 175 

OF ASCLEPIUS 176 

OF ISIS 176 

FROM THE AGATHODAIMON LITERATURE 176 

OF JUDGMENTS OF VALUE 177 

THE SONS OF GOD 178 

CONCERNING DATES 180 

THE BLEND OF TRADITIONS 181 

OF INITIATION 182 

A LAST WORD 183 



I 

Excerpts by Stobaeus 



EXCERPT I. 

OF PIETY AND [TRUE] PHILOSOPHY 

(Title from Patrizzi (p. 4); preceded by “Of Thrice-greatest Hermes.” 

Text: Stobasus, Phys., xxxv. 1, under heading: “Of Hermes — from the [Book] to 
Tat”; G. pp. 273-278; M. i. 190-194; W. i. 273-278. 1 

Menard, Livre IV., No. i. of “Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son 
Tat,” pp. 225-230.) 

I. 2 3 Her. Both for the sake of love to man, and piety to God, I [now], my 
son, for the first time take pen in hand. 4 

For there can be no piety more righteous than to know the things that are, 
and to give thanks for these to Him who made them, — which I will never 
cease to do. 

2. Tat. By doing what, O father, then, if naught be true down here, may 
one live wisely ? 

Her. Be pious 5 , son ! Who pious is, doth reach the height of [all] 
philosophy 6 ; without philosophy the height of piety cannot be scaled. 

But he who learns what are existent things, and how they have been 
ordered, and by whom, and for whose sake, — he will give thanks for all 


1 G. = Gaisford (T.),Joannis Stobai Florilegium (Oxford, 1822), 4 vols.; To. Stob. Ec. Phjs. et Ethic. EibriDno (Oxford, 
1850), 2vols. 

M. = Meineke (A), Job. Stob. Flor. (Leipzig, 1855, 1856), 3 vols.; Job. Stob. Ec. Phjs. et Ethic. Lib. Duo (Leipzig, 1860), 2 
vols. 

W. = Wachsmuth (C.), Io. Stob. Anthologii Lib. Duo Priores . . . Ec. Pbjs. et Ethic. (Berlin, 1884), 2 vols. 

H. = Hense (O.), I. Stob. Anth. Lib. Tert. (Berlin, 1894), 1 vol., incomplete. 

2 I have numbered the paragraphs in all the excerpts for convenience of reference. 

3 slJas(3sia?, — it might also be rendered by worship. 

4 xo8s aukkgatpw. 

5 Or give worship unto God, — et>as(3si. 

6 In its tme sense of wisdom-loving. 


- 6 - 



unto the Demiurge, as unto a good sire, a nurse [most] excellent, a steward 
who doth never break his trust' . 

3. Who giveth thanks, he will be pious; and he who pious is, will [get to] 
know both where is Truth, and what it is. 

And as he learns, he will more and more pious grow. 

For never, son, can an embodied soul that has once leaped aloft, so as to get 
a hold upon the truly Good and True, slip back again into the contrary. 

For when the soul [once] knows the Author of its Peace 8 , ’tis filled with 
wondrous love \ and with forge fulness 10 of every ill, and can no more keep 
from the Good. 

4. Tet this be, O [my] son, the goal of piety; — to which if thou attain, 
thou shalt both nobly live, and happily depart from life, for that thy soul no 
longer will be ignorant of whither it should wing its flight again. 

This is the only [Way], my son, — the Path [that leads] to Truth, [the 
Path] on which our forebears I 11 , too, did set their feet, and, setting them, did 
find the Good 12 . 

Solemn and smooth this Path, yet difficult to tread for soul while still in 
body. 

5. For first it hath to fight against itself, and make a great dissension, and 
manage that the victory should rest with the one part [of its own self. 

For that there is a contest of the one against the two n , — the former trying 
to flee, the latter dragging down. 

And there’s great strife and battle [dire] of these with one another, — the 
one desiring to escape, the others striving to detain. 

6. The victory, moreover, of the one or of the others 4 is not resemblant. 

For that the one doth hasten [upwards] to the Good, the others settle 
[downwards] to the bad. 


I ETUTgOTKB TUCTTfi). 

8 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 3, Comment. 

9 Cf.P.S. A., ix. 1; xii. 3. 

10 Where (forgetfulness) is opposed to Egw? (love), — that is to say, reminiscence, the secret of the pa0r]ai? 

( niathesis ) of the Pythagoreans, the knowledge of the Author of our being or of our “race” within, — '^uyf| paBohoa 
saurf)? tov TigOTtaxoga ( cf. Ex. iii. 6). 

II Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 5; P. S. A., xi. 4; xxxvii. 3; Lact., D. I., i. 11. 

12 Cf. C. H, xi. (xii.) 21. 

13 The “one” is the rational element (to koyixov) and the “two” are the passional (to 0ujjux6v) and desiderative (to 
E7u0upr]Tix6v) elements of the irrational nature (to akoyov, or to aia07]TOv as below), the “heart” and the “appetite.” 
Cf. Ex. xvii.; see also “Orphic Psychology” in my Orpheus (London, 1896), pp. 273-275. 

14 Lit. of the two. 


-7 - 



The one longs to be freed; the others love their slavery. 

If [now] the two be vanquished, they remain deprived of their own selves 
and of their ruler 5 ; but if the one be worsted, ’tis harried by the two, and 
driven about, being tortured by the life down here. 

This 16 is, [my] son, the one who leadeth thee upon the Thither 1, Path. 

Thou must, [my] son, first leave behind thy body 18 , before the end [of it 19 is 
reached], and come out victor in the life of conflict, and thus as victor wend 
thy way towards home. 

7. And now, [my] son, I will go through the things that are by heads 20 ; for 
thou wilt understand the things that will be said, if thou remember what 
thy ears have heard. 

All things that are, are [then] in motion; alone the that which is not, is 
exempt from it. 

Evey body is in a state of change; [but] all bodies are not dissolvable; some 
bodies [only] are dissolvable. 

Not every animal is mortal; not every animal, immortal. 

That which can be dissolved, can [also] be destroyed; the permanent [is] the 
unchangeable; the that which doth not change, [is] the eternal. 

What doth become 21 for ever, for ever also is destroyed 22 ; what once for all 
becomes, is never more destroyed, nor does it [ever more] become some other 
thing. 

8. First God; second the Cosmos; third [is] man 23 . 

The Cosmos, for man's sake; and man, for God’s. 

The soul’s irrational part 24 is mortal; its rational part, immortal. 

All essence [is] immortal; all essence, free from change. 

All that exists 25 [is] twofold; naught of existing things remains. 


15 That is, the one. 

16 Sc. the one. 

17 eksTos — that is, to the Good and True, or God. 

18 Cf. Ex. ix. 12. 

19 Sc. the Path. 

20 Or summarily; cf. § 1 6 below. 

21 Or is born. 

22 Or dies. 

23 tiqcotov 6 0so?, Ssuxsgov 6 koo fro?, xgitov 6 av0gw7to?. Cf. P. S. A., x.: “The Lord of the Eternity (iEon) is the first 
God; second is Cosmos; man’s the third.” 

24 Lit. sensible part , — to aia07]TOV. 

25 7tav to ov, — as opposed to oboia. (essence). 


- 8 - 



Not all are moved by soul; the soul moves all that doth exist 26 . 

9. Nil that suffereth [is] sensible; not all that’s sensible, doth suffer. 

Nil that feels pain, doth also have experience of pleasure, — a mortal life 27 ; 
not all that doth experience pleasure, feeleth [also] pain, — a life immortal. 

Not every body ’s subject to disease; all bodies subject to disease are subject 
[too] to dissolution. 

1 0. The mind’s in God; the reasoningfaculty ’s 28 in man. 

The reason ’s in the mind; the mind’s above all suffering. 

Nothing in body ’s true 29 ; all in the bodiless is free from ivhat’s untrue. 

Nil that becomes, [is] subject unto change; not all that doth become, need be 
dissolved. 

N aught [’s] good upon the earth; naught [’s] bad in heaven. 

1 1 . God [’s] good; [and] man [is] bad 30 . 

Good [is] free-willed; bad is against the will. 

The gods do choose what things are good, as good; . . . 

The good law of the mighty [One] 31 is the good law; good law’s the law. 
Time’s for the gods; the law for men 32 . 

Bad is the stuff that feeds the world; tune is the thing that brings man to an 
end. 

12. Nil in the heaven is free from change; all on the earth is subject unto it. 
Naught in the heaven ’s a slave; naught on the earth is free. 

Nothing can not be known in heaven; naught can be known on earth. 

The things on earth do not consort ivith things in heaven 33 . 

Nil things in heaven are free from blame; all on the earth are bla?neivorthy. 
The immortal is not mortal; the mortal, not immortal 


26 The meaning of ex-istence, being the coming out of pure being into the state of becoming. 

27 Or animal; perhaps this and the following interjection are glosses. 

28 6 koyiapo?, — perhaps a mistake for Xbyoq, as Patrizzi has it. 

29 Or real. 

30 But see § 15 below; and cj. C. H., x. (xi.) 12. 

31 The text is faulty; as is also apparently that of the following sentence. None of the conjectures yet put forward are 
satisfactory. 

32 Or time is divine, the law is man’s. 

33 I have not adopted W.’s lengthy emendations. 


- 9 - 



That which is sown, is not invariably brought forth; but that which is 
brought forth, must have invariably been sown. 

13. [Now] for a body that can be dissolved, [there are] two “tunes”: — [the 
period] from its solving till its birth, and from its birth until its death; but 
for an everlasting body, the time from birth alone 34 . 

Things subject unto dissolution wax and wane. 

The matter that’s dissolved, doth undergo two contrary transformings : — 
death and birth; but everlasting [matter], doth change either to its own self, 
or into things like to itself. 

The birth of man [is] the beginning of his dissolution; man’s dissolution the 
beginning of his birth. 

That which departs 35 , [returns; and what returns] departs [again] 36 . 

14. Of things existent, some are in bodies, some in forms, and some [are] 
in activities 37 . 

Body [s] in forms; and form and energy in body. 

The deathless shares not in the mortal [part]; the mortal shares in the 
immortal. 

The mortal body doth not mount 38 into the deathless one; the deathless one 
descends 39 into the mortal frame. 

Activities do not ascend, but they descend. 

15. The things on earth bestow no benefit on things in heaven; the things in 
heaven shower every benefit on things on earth. 

Of bodies everlasting heaven is the container; of those corruptible, the earth. 

Earth [is] irrational; the heaven [is] rational. 

The things in heaven [are] under it; the things on earth above the earth. 

Heaven [’s] the first element; earth [s] the last element. 

Tore-knowledge 40 [is] God’s Order; Necessity [s] handmaiden to Fore- 
knowledge. 


34 This is the idea of sempiternity — of things which have a beginning but no end. 

35 Or dies. 

36 There is a lacuna in the text. 

37 Or energies. 

38 Lit. go. 

39 Lit. comes. 

40 Or Providence. Cf. P. S. A., xxxix. 2; § 17 below; and Ex. xi. 1. 


- 10 - 



Fortunefs] 41 the course of the disorderly, — the image of activity 42 , untrue 
opinion. 

What, [then] is God? The Good that naught can change. 

What, man? The had that can be changed 13 . 

16. If thou rememberest these heads 44 , thou wilt remember also what I have 
already set forth for thee with greater wealth of words. For these are 
summaries 45 of those. 

Avoid, however, converse with the many [on these things]; not that I would 
that thou shouldst keep them selfishly unto thyself, but rather that thou 
shouldst not seem ridiculous unto the multitude 46 . 

For that the like’s acceptable unto the like; the unlike’ s never friend to the 
unlike. 

Such words as these have very very few to give them ear; nay, probably, they 
will not even have the few 47 . 

They have, moreover, some [strange force] peculiar unto themselves; for they 
provoke the evil all the more to bad. 

Wherefore thou shouldst protect the many from themselves], for they ignore 
the power of what’s been said. 

1 7. Tat. What meanest thou, O father? 

Her. This, [my] son! All that in man is animal, is proner unto bad [than 
unto good]; nay, it doth cohabit with it, because it is in love with it. 

Now if this animal should learn that Cosmos is subject to genesis, and all 
things come and go according to Fore-knowledge 48 and by Necessity, Fate 
ruling all, — in no long time it would grow worse than it is now 49 , [and] 
thinking scorn of the whole [universe] as being subject unto genesis, and 
unto Fate referring [all] the causes of the bad, would never cease from every 
evil deed. 

Wherefore, care should be taken of them, in order that being [left] in 
ignorance, they may become less bad through fear of the unknown. 


41 tuxri. 

42 Or energy. 

43 Reading xgeTtxdv for the hopeless axgSTtxov of the text. Cf.W above. 

44 Cf. § 7 above. 

45 Tisgioxai. 

46 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 13 and 22. 

47 Cf. P. S. A., xxii. 1. 

48 Or Providence; cf. § 1 5 above. 

49 Lit. than itself. 


- 11 - 



COMMENTARY 


Patrizzi thought so highly of this excerpt that he chose it for Book I of his 
collection. He, however, erroneously made the persons of the dialogue Asclepius 
and Tat, instead of Hermes and Tat — an unaccountable mistake, in which he has 
been followed by all the editors of Stobasus except Wachsmuth. 

In the introduction the treatise purports to be a letter written to Tat, — a new 
departure, for it is “for the first time”; on the other hand the form of the treatise is 
the usual one of oral instruction, of question and answer (§ 2). Nevertheless in § 16 
we learn that the definitions given in §§ 7-15 are intended as heads or summaries of 
previous sermons. 

But already in C. H., x. (xi.) 1, we have an abridgment or epitome (or rather a 
summation) of the General Sermons delivered to Tat, just as we have in C. H., xvi., 
“the summing up and digest, as it were, of all the rest” of the Sermons of Asclepius 
to the King, under the traditional title, “The Definitions of Asclepius.” The 
headings in our sermon, then, may probably have been intended for the summary 
of the teaching of the Expository Sermons to Tat (see in Cyril, Frag. xv.). Some of 
our definitions, however, are strikingly similar to those in C. H., x. (xi.), but this 
may be accounted for by supposing that “The Key” itself was one of, or rather the 
continuation of, the Expository Sermons 30 . 

The warning to use great discretion in communicating the instruction to the 
“many,” because of the danger of teaching the Gnosis to the morally unfit, seems 
to be an appropriate ending to the sermon; we may then be fairly confident that we 
have in the above a complete tractate of “The [? Expository] Sermons to Tat”; the 
title, however, is the invention of Patrizzi, and not original. 

EXCERPT II. 

[OF THE INEFFABILITY OF GOD] 

(I have added the title, the excerpt not being found in Patrizzi. 

Text: Stob., Flor., lxxx. [lxxviii.] 9, under the heading: “Of Hermes from the [Book] 
to Tat”; G. iii. 135; M. iii. 104, 105. 51 

Menard, Livre IV., No. x. of “Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son 
Tat,” p. 256.) 

[Her.] To understand 52 God is difficult ; to speak [of Him] impossible. 

For that the Bodiless can never be expressed in body, the Perfect never can 
be comprehended by that which is imperfect, and that \ tis difficult for the 
Eternal to company with the ephemeral. 


50 Cf. R. (p. 128), who calls them a “Collection of Sayings of Hermes.” 

51 Hense’s text ends with xlii. 17; the second part has apparently never been published. 

52 Or think of. 


- 12 - 



The one is for ever ; the other doth pass; the one is in [the clarity of] Truth , 
the other in the shadow of appearance. 


So far off from the stronger [is] the weaker, the lesser from the greater [is so 
far], as [is] the mortal far] from the Divine. 


It is the distance, then, between the two that duns the Vision of the 
Beautiful. 


For his with eyes that bodies can be seen, with tongue that things seen can 
be spoken of; but That which hath no body, that is unmanifest, and 
figure less, and is not made objective [to us] out of matter, — cannot be 
comprehended by our sense. 


I have it in my mind, O Tat, I have it in my mind, that what cannot be 
spoken of, is God. 


COMMENTARY 

Justin Martyr quotes these opening words of our excerpt verbatim , assigning them to 
Hermes {Cohort., 38; Otto, ii. 122) 53 . 

The substance of the second sentence is given twice by Lactantius in Latin (Div. 
Institt., ii. 8; Ep. 4); in the second passage the Church Father also quotes verbatim 
the first sentence of our excerpt, and from his introductory words we learn that 
they were the beginning of a written sermon from Hermes to his son (Tat). 

The first four sentences are also quoted in almost identical words (there being two 
variants of reading and two slight additions) by Cyril , — Contra fulianum, i. 31 
(Migne, col. 549 B), who, moreover, gives some additional lines, beginning (Frag, 
xi.): “If, then, there be an incorporeal eye,” etc. 

If, furthermore, we are right in supposing that Frag. xv. (Cyril, ibid., i. 33) is from 
the same sermon, then this sermon is the “First Sermon of the Expository 
[Sermons] to Tat,” and the Stobasan heading, “From the [Book] to Tat,” will mean 
the collection of Expository Sermons (see Comment, on Frag. xv.). 

EXCERPT III. 

OF TRUTH 

(Title from Patrizzi (p. 46b), preceded by: “Of Thrice-greatest Hermes to Tat.” 

Text: Stob., F/or., xi. 23, under heading: “Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Tat”; 
G, i. 307-311; M. i. 248-251; H. iii. 436-441. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. ix. of “Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son 
Tat,” pp. 251-255.) 


53 Which see for Commentary under “Fragments.” 


- 13 - 



/. [Her.] Concerning Truth, O Tat, it is not possible that man should 
dare to speak, for man ’s an animal imperfect, composed out of imperfect 
members, his tabernacle 4 patched together from many bodies strange [to 
him]. 

But what is possible and right, this do I say, — that Truth is [to be found] 
in the eternal bodies only, [those things] of which the bodies in themselves 
are true 5 , — -fire very fire and nothing else, earth very earth and nothing 
else, air very air and nothing else, and water very water and naught else. 

Our frames, however, are a compound of all these. Tor they have [in them] 
fire, and they have also earth, they’ve water, too, and air; but they are 
neither fire, nor earth, nor water, nor aif 6 , nor any [element that’s] true. 

And if our composition has not had Truth for its beginning how can it 
either see or speak the Truth ? 

Nay, it can only have a notion of it, — [and that too] if God will. 

2. All things, accordingly, that are on earth, O Tat, are not the Truth; 
they’re copies [only] of the True. 

And these are not all things, but few [of them]; the rest consist of falsity 
and error ; Tat, and shows of seeming like unto images. 

Whenever the appearance doth receive the influx from above, it turns into a 
copy of the Truth; without its 57 energiyingfrom above, it is left false. 

Just as the portrait also indicates the body in the picture, but in itself is not 
a body, in spite of the appearance of the thing that’s seen. 

This seen as having eyes; but it sees naught, hears naught at all. 

The picture, too, has all the other things, but they are false, tricking the 
sight of the beholders, — these thinking that they see what’s true, while 
what they see is really false. 

All, then, who do not see what’s false see truth. 

If, then, we thus do comprehend, or see, each one of these 5 * just as it really 
is, we really comprehend and see. 

But if [we comprehend, or see, things] contrary to that which is, we shall 
not comprehend, nor shall we know aught true. 


54 oxrjvog. Cf. Ex. vii. 3 note, and also § 5 below. 

55 Or real. 

56 Compare Lact., D. I., ii. 12. 

57 That is, Truth’s. 

58 This presumably refers to the simple elements of things in themselves. 


- 14 - 



3. [Tat.] There is, then, father, Truth e’en on the earth ? 

[Her. ] Not inconsiderably, O son, art thou at fault. 

Truth is in no wise, Tat, upon the earth, nor can it be. 

But some men can, /T say, ] have an idea of it, — should God grant them 
the poiver of godly vision 59 . 

Thus there is nothing true on earth, — [so much] I know and say. All are 
appearances and shows, — I know and speak true [things]. We ought not, 
surely, though, to call the knowing and the speaking of true things the 
Truth? 

4. [Tat. ] Why, how on earth ought we to know and speak of things being 
true, — -yet nothing’s true on earth? 

[Her. ] This [much] is true, — that we do not know aught that’s true down 
here 60 . How could it be, O son? 

For Truth is the ?nost pefect virtue, the very highest Good, by matter 
undisturbed, uncircumscribed by body, — naked, [and] evident, changeless, 
august, unalterable Good. 

But things down here, O son, thou seest what they are, — not able to receive 
this Good, corruptible, [and] passible, dissolvable, changeful, and ever 
altering, being born from one another. 

Things, then, that are not true even to their oim selves, how can they 
[possibly] be true? 

For all that alters is untrue; it does not stay in ivhat it is, but shows itself 
to us by changing into one another its appearances. 

5. [Tat. J And even man, — is he not true, O father? 

[Her. ] As man, — he is not true, O son. For that the True is that which 
has its composition from itself alone, and in itself stays as it is. 

But man has been composed of many things, and does not stay in his own 
self. 

He changes and he alters, from age to age, from form to form, and that too, 
even while he’s still in [one and] the [same] tend 1 . 


59 xf|v 0soTraxf|v . . . Suvajnv. 

60 Taking Ev0a8e with the preceding clause. 

61 Cf. § 1 above. 


- 15 - 



Nay, many fail to recognise their children, when a brief space of tune comes 
in between; and so again of children with their parents. 

That, then, which changes so that it’s no longer recognised, — can that be 
true, O Tat ? 

Is it not, rather, false, coming and go inf 2 , in the [all] varied shows of its 
[continual] changes ? 

But do thou have it in thy mind that a true thing is that which stays and 
lasts for aye. 

But “man” is not for ever; wherefore if 3 is not true. “Man's” an 
appearance. A nd appearance is extreme untruth. 

6. [Tat. ] But these external bodies 64 , father, too, in that they change, are 
they not true ? 

[Her. ] All that is subject unto genesis and change, is verily not true; but in 
as much as they are brought to being by the Forefather 63 [of them all], they 
have their matter true. 

But even they have somethingfalse in that they change; for naught that doth 
not stay with its own self is true. 

[Tat] True, father [mine]! Is one to say, then, that the Sun alone, — in 
that in greater measure than the rest of them he doth not change but stayeth 
with himself, — is Truth ? 

[Her. ] [Nay, rather, but] because he, and he only, hath entrusted unto him 
the making of all things in cosmos 66 , ruling all and making all; — to whom 
I reverence give, and worship pay unto his Truth, and recognise him as the 
Demiurge after the One and First. 

[Tat. ] What then, O father, should’ st thou say is the first Truth ? 

[Her. ] The One and Only, Tat, — He who is not of matter, or in body, the 
colourless, the figureless, the changeless [One], He who doth alter not, who 
ever is. 

But the untrue, O son, doth perish. All things, however, on the earth that 
perish, — the Forethought of the True hath comprehended [them], and doth 
and will encompass [them]. 


62 Lit. becoming. 

63 Neuter, that is, the series of temporary appearances of the tme man. 

64 The heavenly bodies presumably. 

65 ton TtgOTiatogo?; cf. Ex. i. 3. 

66 Cf. Ex. vii. 2, and § 7 below. 


- 16 - 



For birth without corruption 67 cannot be; corruption follomth on every 
birth , in order that it may be born again. 

For that things that are born, must of necessity be born from things that 
are destroyed 68 ; and things that have been born, must of necessity be [once 
again] destroyed, in order that the genesis of things existent may not stop. 

First, [then], see that thou recognise him 69 as the Demiurge for birth-and- 
death 70 of [all] existent things. 

8. Things that are born out of destruction, then, must of necessity be 
false, — in that they are becoming now these things, now those. For ’tis 
impossible they should become the same. 

Tut that which is not “same, — how can it possibly be true ? 

Such things we should, then, call appearances, [my] son; for instance, if we 
give the man his proper designation, [we ought to designate him] a man’s 71 
appearance; — [and so] the child a child’s appearance, the youth a youth’s 
appearance, the man a man’s appearance, the old man an appearance of 
the same. 

For man is not a man, nor child a child, nor youth a youth, nor grown up 
man a grown up ?nan, nor aged man a [single] aged man. 

Tut as they change they are untrue, — both pre-existent things and things 
existent. 

Tut thus think of them, son, — as even these untruths being energies 
dependent from above from Truth itself. 

And this being so, I say untruth is Truth ’s in-workinf 2 . 

COMMENT 

The excerpt seems complete in itself, but whether it lay before Stob;eus as a single 
sermon or as a part of a sermon it is impossible to say. 


67 Or perishing. 

68 Or are corrupted, or perish. 

69 That is, the Sun; cf. § 6 above. 

70 Lit. genesis. 

71 Lit. manhood’s. 

72 Or operation; EvsgY7](jia. 


- 17 - 



EXCERPT IV. 

[GOD, NATURE AND THE GODS] 


(Patrizzi (p. 51b) gives no title; but simply the heading “In Another [Book].” 

Text: Stob., Phys., xxxv. 11, under the heading: “Of Hermes”; G. pp. 295, 296; M. i. 
206; W. i. 293. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. iv. of “Fragments Divers,” p. 274). 

/. [Her.] There is, then, That which transcends beinf 3 , — beyond all 
things existent, and all that really are. 

Tor That-transcending-being is [that mystery] because of which exists that 
being-ness 74 which is called universal, common unto intelligibles that really 
are, and to those beings which are thought of according to the law of 
sameness. 

Those which are contrary to these, according to the law of otherness, are 
again themselves according to themselves 75 . 

And Nature is an essence which the senses can perceive, containing in itself 
all sensibles. 

2. Between these 76 are the intelligible 77 and the sensible gods. 

Things that pertain to the intelligence, share in [the nature of] the Gods 
that are intelligible only; while things pertaining to opinion, have their part 
with those that are the sensible. 

These latter are the images of the intelligences 78 ; the Sun, fo r instance, is the 
image of the Demiurgic God above the Heaven. 

Tor just as He hath made the universe, so doth Sun make the animals, 
and generate the plants, and regulate the breaths 79 . 


73 Or the pre-existent; to 7igo ov, or to tiqoov. 

74 OUaioTtp;; or essentiality. 

75 This seems to refer to the seven spheres of difference or otherness (xata to etsqov) moving symbolically against, 
or “crosswise with,” the all-embracing sphere of sameness (xa6’ samo); or it may mean that they have a sameness in 
the fact that their motions enter into themselves “again.” 

76 Presumably God and Nature. 

77 votipaTixol, — a very rare form, and may possibly mean perceptible. 

78 VOtlftaTCOV. 

79 Or spirits. The last clause, “and regulates,” etc., is absent from some MSS., and is, therefore, considered spurious 
by some editors; but its unexpectedness is a strong guarantee of its genuineness. The “spirits” are the prana’s of 
Hindu physiological psychology; tf. C. H., x. (xi.) 13, Comment., and Exs. xv. 2, xix. 3. 


- 18 - 



COMMENT 


I have supplied die tide for the sake of uniformity. If we compare our extract with 
Ex. vii, and especially the last sentence of the former with the first sentence of § 2 
of the latter, and note that in Stobasus the one excerpt follows almost immediately 
on the other, we shall be fairly well persuaded that they both come from the same 
collection — namely, the Sermons to Tat. 

EXCERPT V. 

[OF MATTER] 

(I have added the title, it being the same as that of the main section of Stobasus, 
Patrizzi (p. 51) giving only the simple heading “From the [Sermons] to Tat.” 

Text: Stobasus, Phys., xi. 2, under the heading: “Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to 
Tat”; G. p. 121; M. i. 84, 85; W. i. 131. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. viii. of “Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his son 
Tat,” p. 250.) 

Her. Matter both has been born, O son, and it has been [before it came 
into existence] ; for Matter is the vase of genesis 80 , and genesis, the mode of 
energy of God, who’s free from all necessity of genesis, and pre-exists. 

[Matter], accordingly, by its reception of the seed of genesis, did come 
[herself] to birth, and [so] became subject to change, and, being shaped, 
took forms; for she, contriving the forms of her [own] changing, presided 
over her own changing self 

The unborn state 81 of Matter, then, was formlessness 82 ; its genesis is its 
being brought into activity. 


EXCERPT VI. 

OF TIME 

(Title from Patrizzi (p. 38b); followed by: “To the Same Tat.” 

Text: Stob., Phys., viii. 41, under heading: “Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Tat”; 
G. p. 93; M. i. 64. 


80 Or receptacle or field of genesis, or birth (ayYstov Ysvsasw?). The idea of a vessel or vase of birth was a familiar 
symbol with the Pythagoreans; psTaYYiofto? (from the simile of pouring water out of one vessel into another) being 
one of their synonyms for metempsychosis. 

81 ayswriala 

82 ajjiogtpia. Compare this with the Christian Gnostic commentator of the Naassene Document, quoted by 
Hippolytus ( Philos . v. 7), and the comment of Hippolytus on him: “Their first and Blessed Formless Essence 
(aoyripaTiCTTO? ofiala), the cause of all forms” (“Myth of Man,” § 7). 


- 19 - 



Menard, Livre IV., No. v. of “Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son 
Tat,” p. 241.) 

/. NOW to find out concerning the three times; for they are neither by 
themselves, nor [yet] are they at-oned; and [yet] again they are at-oned, and 
by themselves [as well]. 

For should’ st thou think the present is without the past, it can ’t be present 
unless it has become already pasf 3 . 

For from the past the present comes, and from the present future goes. 

But if we have to scrutinize more closely, thus let us argue: 

2. Fast time doth pass into no longer being this 84 , and future [time] doth 
not exist, in its not being present; nay, present even is not present, in its 
continuing. 

Time, then, which stands not [steady] fcnijxs), but which is on the turn, 
without a central point at which to stop, — how can it be called in-stant 
(svsazcog) 85 , seeing even that it hath no power to stand (sazavai)? 

Again, past joining present, and present [joining] future, they [thus] are 
one; for they are not without them 86 in their sameness, and their oneness, 
and their continuity. 

Thus, [then], time’s both continuous and discontinuous, though one and the 
same [time]. 


EXCERPT VII. 

OF BODIES EVERLASTING [AND BODIES PERISHABLE] 

(Title (first half) from Patrizzi (p. 45b), followed by “To the Same Tat.” 

Text: Stob., Phys., xxxv. 8, under the curious heading: “Of Hermes — From the 
[Sermons] to Ammon to Tat”; where “to Tat” is evidendy a marginal correction for 
an erroneous “to Ammon.” G. pp. 292-294; M. i. 204, 205; W. i. 290-292. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. iii. of “Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son 
Tat,” pp. 238, 239.) 

1 . [Her. ] The Ford and Demiurge of all eternal bodies, Tat, when He had 
made them once for all, made them no more, nor doth He make them 
[now]. 


83 That is, apparently, you cannot think of the present until it is already past. 

84 That is, apparently, “present.” 

85 The usual term in Greek for “present,” but I have here translated it by “instant” in order to keep the word-play, 
which would otherwise entirely vanish in translation. 

86 That is, apparently, any one without the other two, or any two without the other one. 


- 20 - 



Committing them unto themselves, and co-uniting them with one another, 
He let them go, in want of naught, as everlasting things. 

If they have want of any, it will be want of one another and not of any 
increase to their number from without, in that they are immortal 

For that it needs must be that bodies made by Him should have their 
nature of this kind. 

2. Our Demiurge 87 , however, who is [himself already] in a body 88 , hath 
made us, — he makes for ever, and will [ever] make, bodies corruptible and 
under sway of death. 

For ’twere not law that he should imitate the Maker of himself — all the 
more so as ’tis impossible. 

For that the latter did create from the first essence which is bodiless; the 
former made as from the body inf 9 brought into existence [by his Ford]. 

3. It follows, then, according to right reason, that while those bodies, since 
they are brought into existence from incorporal essence, are free from death, 
ours are corruptible and under sway of death, — in that our matter is 
composed of bodies 90 , as may be seen from their being iveak and needing 
much assistance. 

For how would it be possible our bodies’ continuity should last, unless it 
had some nutriment imported [into it] from similar elements, and [so] 
renewed our bodies day by day? 

For that we have a stream of earth, and water, fire, and air, flowing into 
us, which renovates our bodies, and keeps our tent 91 together. 

We are too weak to bear the motions [of our frames], enduring them not 
even for one single day. 

For know, [my] son, that if our bodies did not rest at night, we should not 
last a single day. 

4. Wherefore, our Maker, being good, and with foreknowledge of all things, 
in order that the animal may last, hath given sleep, the greatest [calm 92 ] of 


87 That is, the Demiurge of our bodies, which are not everlasting. 

88 The Sun, perhaps; f. C. H., xvi. 18; and Ex., iii. 6 and iv. 2; and Lact., D. /., iv. 6. 

89 awpatcoaew?, — cf. Ex. viii. 5. 

90 Sc. the elements. 

91 oxrjvo?, — used by Plato ( ap . Clem. Alex., 703), and the Pythagoreans (Timasus Locr., 100 A, 101, C, E), and the 
Later Platonists, for the body as the tabernacle of the soul. See especially the response of the Oracle at Delphi, when 
consulted concerning the state of the soul of Plotinus after death, as quoted by Porphyry in his Life of Vlotinus-. “But 
now since thou hast struck thy tent, and left the tomb of thy angelic soul” (see my “Lives of the Later Platonists” in 
The Theosophical Review (July, 1896), xviii. 372. Cf. Ex. iii. 1 and 5; and C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 12 and 15. 


-21 - 



the fatigue of motion, and hath appointed equal time to each, or rather 
more, for rest. 

Ponder well, son, the mightiest energy of sleep, — the opposite to the soul’s 
[energy], but not inferior to it. 

For that just as the soul is motion’s energy, so bodies also cannot live 
without [the help of sleep. 

For ’tis the relaxation and the recreation of the jointed limbs; it also 
operates within, converting into body the fresh supply of matter that flows 
in, apportioning to each its proper [kind], — the water to the blood, the 
earth to bones and marrow, the air to nerves and veins, the fire to sight 93 . 

Wherefore the body, too, feels keen delight in sleep, for it is sleep that brings 
this feeling of delight into activity. 

COMMENT 

Patrizzi’s title is by no means descriptive of the main contents of the excerpt, which 
is evidendy from the Sermons of Hermes to Tat, and from the same collection of 
these from which Stoheus has taken the previous two extracts, — that is, 
presumably, the Expository Sermons. 

EXCERPT VIII. 

OF ENERGY AND FEELING 

(Title from Patrizzi (p. 44); preceded by “Of Thrice-greatest Hermes.” 

Text: Stob., Phys., xxxv. 6, under the heading: “From the [Sermons] to Tat”; G. pp. 
284-291; M. i. 198-203; W. i. 284-289. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. ii. of “Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son 
Tat,” pp. 231-237.) 

/. Tat. Tightly hast thou explained these things, O father [mine]. Now 
give me further teaching as to those. 

For thou hast said somewhere 94 that science and that art do constitute the 
rational’s energy 95 . 

But now thou say’st that the irrational lives 96 , through deprivation of the 
rational, are and are called ir-rational. 


92 Added by Heeren to complete the sense. 

93 Cf. C. H., xvi. 7, note. 

94 That is in some previous sermon. 

95 Action or operation, — svsgysiav eivou ton XoyiKou. Cy §11 below. 

96 Or animals. 


- 22 - 



According to this reasoning, [therefore], it follows of necessity that the 
irrational lives are without any share in science or in art, through 
deprivation of the rational, 

2. Her. [It follows] of necessity, [my] son. 

Tat. How, then, O father, do we see some of irrational [creatures] using 
[both] intelligence, and art ? — the ants, for instance, storing their food for 
winter, and in like fashion, [too,] the creatures of the air building their 
nests, and the four-footed beasts [each] knowing their oivn holes 9 ' . 

Her. These things they do, O son, neither by science nor by art, but by [the 
force of] nature. 

Science and art are teachable; but none of these irrationals is taught a 
thing. 

Things done by nature are [so] done by reason of the general energy of 
things. 

Things [done] by art and science are achieved by those who know, [and] 
not by all. 

Things done by all are brought into activity 98 by nature. 

3. For instance, all look up [to heaven ]; but all [are] not musicians, or 
[are] all archers, or hunters, or the rest. 

Tut some of them have learned one thing [others another thing], science 
and art being active 99 [in them]. 

In the same way, if some ants only did this thing and others not, thou 
would ’st have rightly said they acted by [the light] of science, and stored 
their food by means of art. 

Tut if they all without distinction are driven by their nature to [do] this, 
though [it may be] against their will , — ’tis plain they do not do it or by 
science or by art. 

4. For Tat, these energies, though [in themselves] they are incorporal, are 
found] in bodies, and act through bodies. 


97 xoci xa aegcoc Croa opolw? xockca? socuxoi? auvxiOsvxa, xa 8 e xsxga7io8a yvwg^ovxa xoi)? tpwXeoi)? xou? i8cou?. 
Compare Matt. viii. 20 = Luke ix. 58 (word for word): at akwttsxs? tpwXeot)? E^ouacv xoci xa ttexecva xou ougavou 
xaxaaxr]vwaei? — “The foxes have holes and the birds of the air nests.” The first and third Evangelists here copy 
verbally from their “Logia” source. 

98 Or energized. 

99 Or energizing. 


- 23 - 



Wherefore, O Tat, in that they are incorporal, thou sayest that they are 
immortal; hut, in so far as without bodies they cannot manifest activity 00 , I 
say that they are ever in a body. 

Things once called into being for some purpose, or some cause, things that 
come under Providence and Fate, can never stay inactive of their proper 
energy. 

For that which is, shall ever be; for that this [being] is [the very] body and 
the life of it. 

5. It follows from this reason, [then,] that these are always bodies. 

Wherefore I say that “bodying” 101 itself is an eternal [exercise of] energy. 

If bodies are on earth, they're subject unto dissolution; yet must these [ever] 
be [on earth to sen>e] as places and as organs for the energies. 

The energies, however ; [are] immortal, and the immortal is eternally , — 
[that is, that] body-making, if it ever is' 02 , is energy. 

6. [The energies] accompany the soul, though not appearing all at once. 

Some of them energige the man the moment that he's born, united with the 
soul round its irrational [parts]; inhere as the purer ones, with change of 
age 103 , co-operate with the soul's rational part. 

But all these energies depend on bodies. From godly 104 bodies they descend 
to mortal frames], these body-making [energies]; each one of them is [ever] 
active, either around the body or the soul. 

Yea, they are active with the soul itself without a body. They are for ever in 
activity. 

The soul, however, is not for ever in a mortal body, for it can be without the 
body; whereas the energies can never be without the bodies. 

This is a sacred saying (logos), son: Body apart from soul cannot persist; its 
being can 105 . 

7. Tat. What dost thou mean, O father [mine]? 


100 Lit. energize. 

101 awpatcoaiv, — cf. Ex. vii. 2; tf. also the (Jiu^weri? of K. K, 9. 

102 That is, if it goes on continually. 

103 xata peTa(3okr]v irjg f|X.ixia<;, — generally supposed to be the seventh year. Compare the apocryphal logos-. “He who 
seeks me shall find me in children from the age of seven years” — quoted by the Christian Overwriter of the 
Naassene Document from the Gospel according to Thomas (Hipp., Philos., v. 7; § 7 in “Myth of Man”). 

104 Or divine, — the bodies of the Gods, the heavenly bodies, or the spiritual and immortal bodies of the soul. 

105 auvsatavai psv arapa 3 (wgi<; <(' u X'n? 013 Suvatai, to 8e eivai Suvaxai, — “its being” presumably refers to the abstract 
“bodying” (acopatwaig) referred to above. 


- 24 - 



Her. Thus understand it, Tati When soul leaves body, body itself remains. 

Tut [even] the body so abandoned 106 as long as it remains, is in activity, 
being broken up and made to disappear. 

For body without [the exercise of] energy could not experience these 
things 107 . 

This energy, accordingly, continues with the body when the soul has gone. 

This, therefore, is the difference of an immortal body and a mortal one , — 
that the immortal doth consist of a one single matter, but this [body does] 
not. 

The former’s active, and the latter’s passive. 

For every thing that maketh active is the stronger; and [every thing] that is 
made active is the weaker. 

The stronger, too, being in authority and free, doth lead; the [weaker] 
follows [as] a slave. 

8. The energies, then, energise not only bodies that are ensouled, but also 
[bodies] unensouled, — stocks, stones 108 , and all such things; — both 
making [them] to grow, and to bear fruits, and ripening [them], dissolving 
melting rotting and crumbling [them], and setting up [in them] all like 
activities which bodies without souls can undergo. 

For energy’s 109 the name, O son, for just the thing that’s going on, — that is 
becoming. 

And many things needs must for ever be becoming nay, rather, all things 
[must]. 

For never is Cosmos bereft of any of existent things, but being borne 110 for 
aye in its own self it bears existent things, — [things] that shall never cease 
from being destroyed again 111 . 

9. Know, then, that energy of every kind is ever free from death, — no 
matter what it is, or in what body. 


106 Lit. this body. 

107 Sc. dissolution and disappearance. 

108 Cf. Naassene Document, § 4, and § 13 below. 

109 Or activity. 

11(1 Or conceived. 

111 Reading at)6i? for auxoti, with Heeren. 


- 25 - 



And of the energies, so?ne are of godly bodies, and some of those which are 
corruptible; some [are] general, and some special. Some [are] of genera, and 
some are of the parts of every genus. 

The godly ones, [accordingly], are those that exercise their energies through 
everlasting bodies. And these are pefect [energies], in that [they energiye] 
through pefect bodies. 

Tut partial [energies are] those [that energiye] through each one of the 
[single] living things. 

And special [energies are those that energise] through each one of existent 
things. 

10. This argument, accordingly, O son, deduces that all things are full of 
energies. 

For though it needs must be that energies should be in bodies, — and there 
be many bodies in the Cosmos, — I say that energies are many more than 
bodies. 

For often in one body there is found] one, and a second and a third 
[activity], — not counting in the general ones that come with it. 

By general ones I ?nean the purely corporal ones, that exercise themselves 
through the sensations 12 and the motions [of the body]. 

For that without these energies the body [of an animal] can not persist. 

1 1 . The souls of men, however, have a second class of energies, — the special 
ones [that exercise themselves] through arts, and sciences, and practices, and 
furposed] doings 1 ' 3 . 

For that the feelings' 14 follow on the energies or rather are completions" 5 of 
the energies. 

Know, then, O son, the difference of energy and of sensation. 

[Thus] energy is sent down from above ; whereas sensation, being in the 
body and having its existence from it, receives the energy and makes it 
manifest, as though it did embody it. 

Wherefore I say sensations are both corporal and mortal, and last as long 
as doth the body [only]. 


112 Or feelings. 

113 EvegY ) 1it® TWV > — tf- § 1 above. 

114 Or sensations. 

115 Or effects — aTtoteXeagata. 


- 26 - 



Nay, rather, its sensations are born together with the body, and they die 
with it. 

12. But the immortal bodies in themselves have no sensation, — [not even 
an] immortal [one], as though they were composed out of some essence of 
some kind. 

For that sensation doth arise entirely from naught else than either from the 
bad or else the good that’s added to the body, or that is, on the contrary, 
taken from it] again. 

But with eternal bodies there is no adding to nor taking from. 

Wherefore, sensation doth not occur in them. 

13. Tat. Is, then, sensation felt in every body ? 

Her. In every body, son ; and energies are active in all [bodies, too]. 

Tat. Even in bodies without souls, O father [mine]? 

Her. Even in them, O son. There are, however, differences in the 
sensations. 

The feelings of the nationals occur with reason; those of irrationals are 
simply corporal; as for the things that have no soul, they [also] have 
sensations, but passive ones, — experience of increase [only] and decrease 116 . 

Moreover, passion and sensation depend from one [same] head" 7 , and they 
are gathered up again into the same, and that, too, by the energies. 

14. Of lives' 18 with souls there are two other energies which go with the 
sensations and the passions, — grief and joy. 

Hnd without these, an ensouled life, and most of all a rational one, could 
not experience sensation. 

Wherefore, I say that there are forms of passions, — [and] forms that 
dominate the rational lives more [than the rest]. 

The energies, then, are the active forces [in sensations], while the sensations 
are the indications of the energies. 

15. Further, as these 19 are corporal, they’re set in motion by the irrational 
parts of [a man’s] soul; wherefore, I say that both of them are mischievous. 


116 Cf. § 8 above, and note. 

117 and [ufi? xoQucprjg fjgx7]VTai. Compare this with Plato, Phado, i. 60 B, where Socrates speaks of the pleasant and the 
painful as “two (bodies) hanging from one head” (ex puoig xogucpfji; aov7]fifisvG)). 

118 Or animals. 

119 That is, the sensation of pleasure and pain. 


- 27 - 



For that both joy, though [for the moment] it provides sensation joined with 
pleasure, immediately becomes a cause of many ills 20 to him who feeleth it; 
while grief [itself] provides [still] greater pains and suffering 

Wherefore, they both would seem [most] mischievous. 

16. Tat. Can, then, sensation be the same in soul and body, father [mine]? 

Her. How dost thou mean, — sensation in the soul, [my] son? 

Tat. Surely it cannot be that soul’s incorporal, and that sensation is a 
body, father, — sensation which is sometimes in a body and sometimes not, 
just as the soul]? 

Her. If we should put it in a body, son, we should [then] represent it as 
like the soul or [like] the energies. For that we say these 121 are incorporals 
in bodies. 

But [as] sensation’s neither energy nor soul, nor any other thing than body, 
according to what has been said above, it cannot, therefore, be incorporal. 

And if it’s not incorporal, it must be body. 

For of existing things some must be bodies and the rest incorporal, 

COMMENT 

Again, as with the last excerpt, the earlier editions of Stobseus have Asclepius and 
Tat as the persons of the dialogue instead of Hermes and Tat. Wachsmuth gives 
them correcdy. 

The second sentence is of great interest, for it refers us presumably to C. H., x. 
(xi.), 22: “God’s rays, to use a figure, are his energies; the Cosmos’s are natures; the 
arts and sciences are man’s.” Seeing, however, that “The Key” is an Epitome of the 
General Sermons to Tat, the statement may also have been made in one of these 
sermons. 

In either case the existence of these General Sermons is presupposed, and, 
therefore, it may be that our excerpt is, again, one of the Expository Sermons to 
Tat. The beginning of the Sermon has clearly been omitted by Stobasus, and 
apparendy the end also. 


EXCERPT IX. 

OF [THE DECANS AND] THE STARS 

(Patrizzi (p. 38b) does not give the first third of the text (§§ 1-5), and his title, “Of 
the Stars,” is evidendy incomplete; it is followed by “To the Same \i.e. Tat].” 


120 Sc. by contrast. 

121 That is, soul and energies. 


- 28 - 



Text: Stob., Rhys., xxi. 9, under the heading: “Of Hermes from the [Sermon] to 
Tat,” pp. 184-190; M. i. 129-133; W. i. 189-194. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. vi. of “Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son 
Tat,” pp. 242-247, under the sub-heading, “Of the Decans and the Stars.”) 

/. Tat. Since in thy former General Sermons (Hogoi 122 ), father ] thou 
didst promise me an explanation of the Six-and-thirty Decans 23 , explain , 

I prithee, now concerning them and their activity 24 . 

Her. There’s not the slightest wish in me not to do so, O Tat, and this 
should prove the most authoritative sermon ( logos j and the chiefest of them 
all. So ponder on it well. 

We have already spoken unto thee about the Circle of the Animals, or the 
Tife-giving one 25 , of the Five Planets, and of Sun and Moon, and of the 
Circle 26 of each one of these. 

2. Tat. Thou hast done so, Thrice-greatest one. 

Her. Thus would I have thee understand as well about the Six-and-thirty 
Decans, — calling the former things to mind, in order that the sermon on 
the latter may also be well understood by thee. 

Tat. I have recalled them, father, [to my mind]. 

Her. We said, [my] son, there is a Body which encompasses all things. 

Conceive it, then, as being in itself a kind of figure of a sphere-like shape; 
so is the universe conformed. 

Tat. I’ve thought of such a figure in my mind, just as thou dost describe, O 
father [mine]. 

3. Her. Beneath the Circle of this [all-embracing] frame 127 are ranged the 
Six-and-thirty Decans, between this Circle of the Universe and that one of 
the Animals, determining the boundaries of both these Circles, and, as it 
were, holding that of the Animals aloft up in the air, and [so] defining it. 

They 128 share the motion of the Planetary Spheres, and [yet] have equal 
powers with the [main] motion of the Whole ~ , crosswise the Seven. 


122 ev toi? Ejjwigoobev yevixoT; Xoyoic,. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 1 and 7; xiii. (xiv.) 1; and Ex. xviii. 1. 

123 These are the “Horoscopes” of P. S. A., xix. 3. Cf. also Origen, C. Cels., viii. 58; R. 225, n. 1. 

124 Or energy. 

125 The zodiac; Tisgi too £w8iaxoo xoxXoo t) too £wotp6goo, — of which the second member is probably a gloss; but 
see § 8 below. 

126 Or sphere. 

127 Or body. 

128 That is, the Decans. 

129 Or Universe. 


- 29 - 



They’re 131 checked by nothing but the All-encircling Tody, for this must be 
the final thing in the [whole grades of motion, — itself by its own self 

Tut they speed on the Seven other Circles, because they 132 move with a less 
rapid motion than the [Circle] of the All, 

Tet us, then, think of them as though of Watchers stationed round [and 
watching] over both the Seven themselves and o’er the Circle of the All , — 
or rather over all things in the World, — holding together all, and keeping 
the good order of all things. 

4. Tat. Thus do I have it, father, in my mind, from what thou say ’st. 

Her. Moreover, Tat, thou should’ st have in thy mind that they are also free 
from the necessities laid on the other Stars. 

They are not checked and settled in their course, nor are they further] 
hindered and made to tread in their own steps again 133 ; nor are they kept 
away from 134 the Sun’s light, — [all of which things the other Stars endure. 

Tut free, above them all, as though they were inerrant Guards and 
Overseers of the whole, they night and day surround the universe. 

5. Tat. Do these, then, also, further exercise an influence 135 upon us? 

Her. The greatest, O [my] son. For if they act in 136 them 137 , how should 
they fail to act on us as well, — both on each one of us and generally? 138 

Thus, O [my] son, of all those things that happen generally, the bringing 
into action 139 is from these 140 ; as for example, — and ponder what I say , — 
downfalls of kingdoms, states’ rebellions, plagues [and] famines, tidal 


130 This refers to the astronomical system underlying the Pythagoreo -Platonic tradition, as, for instance, set forth 
allegorically and symbolically by Plato in the famous passage in The Timcens (36 B, C). “The entire compound he (the 
Demiurge) divided lengthways into two parts, which he joined to one another at the centre like the letter X, and bent 
them into a circular form, connecting them with themselves and each other at the point opposite to their original 
meeting point; and, comprehending them in a uniform revolution upon the same axis, he made the one the outer and 
the other the inner circle. Now the motion of the outer circle he called the motion of the same, and the motion of 
the inner circle the motion of the other or diverse” (Jowett’s Translation, iii. 454, 455). The X symbolizes the 
“crosswise,” which in terms of motion may be translated as “inverse to.” 

131 Sc. the Decans. 

132 The Decans. 

133 Referring, presumably, to the fixed stars and the planets. 

134 Reading hub for 1 ) 710 , — referring to eclipses. 

135 Or energy. 

136 Or energize. 

137 That is, the Seven Spheres. 

138 The rest of the fragment is also found in Patrizzi (p. 38b) under the title “Of the Stars.” 

139 Or energy. 

140 Sc. the Decans. 


- 30 - 




waves [ and] qua kings of the earth ; no one of these, O son, takes place 
without their action 141 . 

Nay, further still, bear this in mind. If they rule over them, and we are in 
our turn beneath the Seven, dost thou not think that some of their activity 
extends to us as well, — [who are] assuredly their sons, or [come into 
existence] by their means ? 

6. Tat. What, [then,] may be the type 142 of body that they have, O father 
[nine]? 

Her. The many call them dam/ones; but they are not some special class of 
dam/ones, for they have not some other kind of bodies made of some special 
kind of matter ; nor are they moved by means of soul, as we [are moved], 
but they are [simple] operations 143 of these Six-and-thirty Gods. 

Nay, further, still, have in thy mind, O Tat, their operations, — that they 
cast in the earth the seed of those whom [men] call Tanes, some playing the 
part of saviou rs, others being most destructive 144 . 

7. Further the Stars 145 in heaven as well do in their several [courses] bear 
them 146 underworkers 147 ; and they 148 have ministers and warriors 149 too. 

And they in [everlasting] congress with them speed on their course in 
cether floating fulfilling [all] its 152 space, so that there is no space above 
empty of stars. 


141 Cf. C. H, xvi. 10. 

142 xutto?. The question concerning the spiritual and other spaces and their inhabitants, “Of what type are they?” — 
occurs with great frequency in the Bruce and Askew Gnostic Codices. 

143 Or energies. 

144 On Kcd si? xt]v yrjv a7iegpaxli(ouaiv a? xakotial xava?, xa? psv awxt]giou?, xa? 8e okeOgiwxaxa?. Neither Patrizzi nor 
Gaisford, nor Meineke, nor Wachsmuth, nor Menard, has a word to say on this most interesting passage. I would 
suggest in the first place that the text is faulty, and that we should read “oil? xakouoi Tava?, xou? psv auxt]giou?, xou? 
8e dkeOgiwxaxou?”; and in the second that Tava? is a shortened form of Tixfiva? or Titans. Tava? (? from Tav) is 
connected with xavao?, “stretched out,” from Vxav, just as Tixav is connected with xixaivco, — Tixavs? thus signifying 
the Stretchers or Strivers. It may, however, also be connected with xixa? (xixr)<?) — from xivw, and so mean Avengers. 
Cf. J. Laurent. Lydus, De Mensibus, iv. 31 (W. 90, 24), as given in note to P. S. A., xxviii. 1. 

145 The planetary spheres, presumably. 

146 Sc. the Decans. 

147 iiTtoXsixouQYO'j? — a anof Xsyopsvov. The term keitoupyoi, however, is of frequent occurrence in the Askew and 
Bruce Codices. See, for instance, Pistis Sophia (Schwartze’s Trans.), p. 10: “Atque 8exavoi ag^ovtcov eorumque 
XenooQyoi” 

148 The Decans. 

149 oxgaxicoxa? — soldiers; one of the most famous of the degrees of the Mithriac mysteries was that of the Soldier. 

See Cumont (F.), Textes et Monuments Figure's relatifs aux Mysteres de Mithra (Bruxelles; 1899), i. 315, and especially 317, 

n. 1. 

150 The Star-spheres. 

151 The Decans. 

152 iEther’s. 


-31 - 



They are the cosmic engine of the universe 153 , having their oivn peculiar 
action, which is subordinate, however, to the action of the Thirty-six , — 
from whom throughout [all] lands arise the deaths of [all] the other lives 154 
with souls, and hosts of [lesser] lives that spoil the fruit. 

8. And under them 155 is what is called the Bear 156 , — -just in the middle of 
the Circle of the Animals 57 , composed of seven stars, and with another 
corresponding [Bear 158 ] above its head. 

Its energy is as it were an axle ’s, setting nowhere and nowhere rising, but 
stopping [ever] in the self-same space, and turning round the same, giving 
its proper motion to the Fife-producing Circle , and handing over this 
whole universe from night to day, from day to night. 

And after this 161 there is another choir of stars, to which we have not 
thought it proper to give names; but they who will come after us' 62 , in 
imitation, will give them names themselves 163 . 

9. Again, below the Moon, are other stars 164 , corruptible, deprived of 
energy, which hold together for a little while, in that they’ve been exhaled 
out of the earth itself into the air above the earth, — which ever are being 
broken up, in that they have a nature like unto [that of] useless lives on 
earth, ivhich come into existence for no other pupose than to die, — such as 
the tribe of flies, and fleas, and worms, and other things like them. 

For these are useful, Tat, neither to us nor to the world; but, on the 
contrary, they trouble and annoy, being nature’s by-products 165 , which oive 
their birth to her extravagance 166 . 

just in the same way, too, the stars exhaled from earth do not attain the 
upper space. 

They cannot do so, since they are sent forth from below; and, owing to the 
greatness of their weight, dragged down by their own matter, they quickly 


153 auYKoafjioijvTSQ to ti&v. 

154 Or animals. 

155 The Decans. 

156 The Great Bear. Compare “Behold the Bear up there that circles round the Pole.” 

157 The zodiac. 

158 The Little Bear. 

159 Lit. energy. 

160 Cf. § 1 above. 

161 Sc. the Bear. 

162 Cf. P. S. A., xii. 3; xiv. 1. 

163 That is, apparently, invent them out of their own heads haphazard. 

164 Referring, presumably, to the phenomena of “shooting stars.” 

165 TtagaKoXouhtiftaTa — seqnella. 

166 See the same idea in Plutarch, De Is. et Os., iv. 5, concerning lice. 


- 32 - 



are dispersed, and, breaking up, fall back again on earth, affecting nothing 
but the mere disturbance of the air about the earth. 

10. There is another class, O Tat, that of the so-called long-haired 
[stars] 167 , appearing at their proper times, and after a short time, becoming 
once again invisible; — they neither rise nor set nor are they broken up. 

These are the brilliant messengers and heralds of the general destinies of 
things 168 that are to be. 

They occupy the space below the Circle of the Sun. 

When, then, some chance is going to happen to the world, [comets] appear, 
and, shining for some days, again return behind 169 the Circle of the Sun, 
and stay invisible, — some showing in the east, some in the north, some in 
the west, and others in the south. We call them Prophets' 70 . 

1 1 . Such is the nature of the stars. The stars, however, differ from the star- 

171 

groups . 

The stars are they which sail 172 in heaven; the star-groups, on the contrary, 
are fixed in heaven's frame 173 , and they are borne along together with the 
heaven, — Tivelve out of ivhich we call the Zodia 174 . 

He who knows these can form some notion clearly of [what] God is; and, if 
one should dare say so, becoming [thus] a seer for himself, [so] contemplate 
Him, and, contemplating Him, be blessed. 

12. Tat. Blessed, in truth, is he, O father [mine], who contemplateth Him. 

Her. But ’tis impossible, O son, that one in body 175 should have this good 
chance. 

Moreover, he should train his soul beforehand, here and now, that when it 
reacheth there, [the space] where it is possible for it to contemplate, it may 
not miss its way. 

But men who love their bodies, — such men will never contemplate the 
Vision of the Beautiful and Good. 


167 The comets — xcov xodoupivcov xopexcov. 

168 aTtOXsXsafJiaTCdV. 

169 Lit. below. 

17,1 ftavxsi?, seers or diviners. 

171 aaxsgs? 8 e aaxQtov Siatpogav syooaiv. The aaxsgs? are the planets, aerolites and comets; the aoxga are the sidera, 
signs of the fixed stars or constellations. 

172 Or float (aiwgouftsvoi), lit. are raised aloft. 

173 Or body. 

174 The zodiac; lit. the animal signs, or signs of lives. 

175 Cf. Ex. i. 6. 


- 33 - 



For what, O son, is that [fair] Beauty which hath no form nor any colour, 
nor any mass 176 ? 

Tat. Can there be aught that’s beautiful apart from these ? 

Her. God only, O [my] son; or rather that which is still greater, — the 
f roper] name of God. 


COMMENTARY 

The earlier editors of Stobasus (apparendy following the mistake of Patrizzi) have 
Asclepius instead of Tat as the second person of the dialogue, which is clearly 
wrong according to the text itself (see the first sentence given to Hermes, and §§ 9 
and 10)“. 

The excerpt is from a sermon in the Collection to Tat. It belongs to the further 
explanation of things referred to only generally in the General Sermons; it is, 
therefore, again probably from one of the Expository Sermons, in which series 
already a sermon has been given on the Zodiacal Twelve and on the Seven Spheres. 

Seeing also that it is stated that this sermon is “most authoritative and the chiefest 
of them all,” we must suppose that it came at the end of one of the Books of the 
Expository Sermons. 

We seem to have the beginning of the sermon, but not the end, for Stobasus breaks 
off in an aimless and provoking fashion in the midst of a subject. 

For a list of the Egyptian names of the Decans, with their Greek transcriptions and 
symbols, see Budge, Gods of the Egyptians , ii. 304-308. 

EXCERPT X. 

[CONCERNING THE RULE OF PROVIDENCE, NECESSITY 

AND FATE] 

(Title in Patrizzi (p. 38), “Of Fate,” simply; followed by “From the [Sermons] to 
Tat.” 

Text: Stob., Phys., iv. 8, under heading: “Of Hermes to his Son”; G. pp. 61, 62; M. i. 
42, 43; W. i. 73, 74. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. vii. of “Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son 
Tat,” pp. 248, 249.) 

1. [Tat] Tightly, O father, hast thou told me all; now further, [pray] 
recall unto my mind what are the things that Providence doth rule, and 
what the things ruled by Necessity, and in like fashion also [those] under 
Fate. 


176 Or body. 

177 Menard and Wachsmuth have Tat. For other changes of a similar nature tf. Exx. i. and viii., and C. H., ii. (iii.), and 
xvii. 


- 34 - 



[Her. ] I said there ivere in us, O Tat, three species of incorporals. 

The first’s a thing the mind alone can grasp 178 ; it thus is colourless, 
figure less, massless 79 , proceeding out of the First Essence in itself, sensed by 
the mind alone 180 . 

-i Q -i -i Q O 

A nd there are also, [secondly,] in us, opposed to this , configurings , — 
of which this serves as the receptacle 183 . 

Tut what has once been set in motion by the Trimal 184 Essence for some 
[set] purpose of the Keason (Eogos), and that has been conceived 185 [by it], 
straightway doth change into another form of motion; this is the image of 
the Demiurgic Thought 186 . 

2. And there is [also] a third species of incorporals, which doth eventuate 
round bodies, — space, time, [and] motion, figure, suface 187 , siye, [and] 
species. 

Of these there are two [sets of differences. 

The first [lies] in the quality pertaining specially unto themselves; the 
second [set is] of the body. 

The special qualities are figure, colour ; species, space, time, movement. 

[The differences] peculiar to body are figure configured, and colour coloured; 
there’s also form conformed, suface and s iff 88 . 

The latter with the former have no part. 

3. The Intelligible Essence, then, in company with God' 89 , has power o ’er 
its own self, and [power] to keep 190 another, in that it keeps itself, since 
Essence in itself is not under Necessity. 

Tut ivhen ’tis left by God, it takes unto itself the corporal nature; its choice 
of it being ruled by Providence, — that is, its choosing of the world 191 . 


178 Or an intelligible something. 

179 Or bodiless. 

180 That is, the intelligible essence. 

181 Sc. of opposite nature to the first incorporal, as negative to positive, say. 

182 axt][A0cx6xr]xe<; — that is, the “somethings” more subtle or ideal than figures or shapes, — types, or prototypes, or 
paradigms of some kind. 

183 That is, plays the part of matter, “womb,” or “nurse” to these. 

184 Lit. intelligible. 

185 Or received. 

186 Or Mind. Heeren (as also all editors subsequent to him) thinks that something has here fallen out of the text, 
because he finds no second incorporal specifically mentioned; but the duality of the demiurgic thought, active and 
passive, creative and conceptive, will do very well for the second. 

187 Or appearance. 

188 The distinction seems to be between colour, form, etc., “in itself,” and differentiated colours, forms, etc. 

189 ttgd? xfi) 0eq> yevoftsvy]. 

190 Or save, preserve. 


- 35 - 



All the irrational is moved to-wards some reason. 

Reason [comes] under Providence; unreason [falls] under Necessity; the 
things that happen in the corporal fall] under Pate. 

Such is the Sermon on the rule of Providence, Necessity and Fate. 

COMMENT 

I have taken the title from the concluding words, which are evidently the end of the 
sermon. Stobasus thus seems to have reproduced the whole of this little tractate, 
which should be read in connection with Exx. xi., xii. and xiii. C. H., xii. ( xii i.) 6 
(see Commentary), seems to presuppose this sermon. 

EXCERPT XI. 

[OF JUSTICE] 

(I have added the title, the excerpt not being found in Patrizzi. 

Text: Stob., Phys., iii. 52, under the vague heading: “Of Hermes”; G. p. 50; M. i. 33, 
34; W. i. 62, 63. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. iv. of “Fragments from the Books of Hermes to his Son 
Tat,” p. 240.) 

1. [Her] For there hath been appointed, O [my] son, a very mighty 
Daimon turning in the universe ’s midst, that sees all things that men do on 
the earth. 

fust as Foreknoivledge 192 and Necessity have been set o ’er the Order of the 
gods, in the same way is Justice set o \ er men, causing the same to act on 
them. 

For they rule o ’er the order of the things existing as divine, which have no 
will, nor any power, to err. 

For the Divine cannot be made to wander; from which the incapacity to err 
accrues [to it]. 

But Justice is appointed to correct the errors men conwiit on earth. 

2. For, seeing that their race is under sway of death, and made out of bad 
matter, [it naturally errs], and failure is the natural thing especially to 
those ivho are without the power of seeing the Divine 193 . 


191 This sentence seems to be corrupt. 

192 Or Providence. Cf. Ex. i. 15, note. 

193 This recalls Philo’s description of the Therapeuts, who were “taught ever more and more to see,” and strive for 
the “intuition” or “sight of that which is,” — xrjg xoti ovto? 0sa? (Philo, D. V. C., 891 P., 473 M.). 


- 36 - 



Tis over these that Justice doth have special sway. They ’re subject both to 
Tate through the activities of birth 194 , and unto Justice through the 
mistakes [ they make] in life 195 . 

COMMENT 

The title and place of this excerpt has been discussed in the Commentary on C. H., 
xii. (xiii.) 6. It belongs to the Tat-Sermons, and in the collection of Lactantius 
probably stood prior to the Sermon of Hermes to Tat, “About the General 
Mind.” 196 

EXCERPT XII. 

OF PROVIDENCE AND FATE 

(Title from Patrizzi (p. 38); followed by: “From the [Sermons] to Ammon.” 

Text: Stob., Phys., v. 20, under heading: “Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to 
Ammon”; G. p. 70; M. i. 48, 49; W. i. 82. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. ii. of “Fragments of the Books of Hermes to Ammon,” p. 
258.) 

Mix things are born by Nature and by Fate, and there is not a [single] 
space bereft of Providence. 

Now Providence is the S elf pe feet 1 97 Reason. 

And of this [Reason] there are two spontaneous powers, — Necessity and 
Fate. 

And Fate doth minister to Providence and to Necessity; while unto Fate 
the Stars ' 98 do minister. 

For Fate no one is able to escape, nor keep himself from their 199 shrewd 
scrutiny 200 . 

For that the Stars are instruments of Fate; it is at its behest that they effect 
all things for nature and for men 201 . 


194 That is, through the natural accidents that attend life in a body. 

195 That is, in their way of living — ev tea (3lw. 

196 Compare with it Exx. x., xii., xiii. 

197 ocoxoxeUp Xoyoq, — complete in itself. 

198 That is, the Seven Spheres. 

199 Sc. of the Stars. 

200 8siv6xt]xo?. 

201 With this extract compare Exx. x., xi., xiii. 


- 37 - 



EXCERPT XIII. 

OF THE WHOLE ECONOMY 


(Patrizzi (p. 38) gives no title, but only the heading: “To the Same Ammon 
(Ajijxoova).” 

Text: Stob., Phys., v. 16, under sub-heading: “Of the Whole Economy,” followed 
by: “Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Ammon (Afiotiv 202 )”; G. p. 68; M. i. 47; W. 
i. 79, 80. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. i. of “Fragments of the Books of Hermes to Ammon”). 


NO W what supporteth the whole W orl f 03 , is Providence; what holdeth it 
together and encircleth it about \ is [called] Necessity; what drives all on and 
drives them round 304 , is Fate ; bringing Necessity to bear on them (for that 
its nature is the bringing into play of [this] Necessity); [it 205 is] the cause of 
birth and death 206 of life. 

So, then, the Cosmos is beneath the sway of Providence 207 for Sis the first 
to meet with it); but Providence [itself 208 extends itself to Heaven. 

For which cause , too, the Gods revolve, and speed round [Heaven] , 
possessed of tireless, never-ceasing motion. 

Put Fate [extends itself in Cosmos ]; for which cause, too, Necessity 
[encompasses the Cosmos] 211 . 

And Providence foreknows; but Fate’s the reason of the disposition of the 
Stars 212 . 

Such is the law that no one can escape, by which all things are ordered 213 . 


202 The only place in which this form occurs in Stobasus; tf. v. 20, and xxxv. 4, 7, 8. 

203 Or Cosmos. 

204 Or makes them to revolve. 

205 Fate — sifj.agfji.svri. 

206 Or destmction. 

207 Lit. “first has Providence.” The following words in parentheses seem to be the gloss of a scribe who was puzzled 
by the sentence. Usener, however, would detect a lacuna after the parentheses and the beginning of a new excerpt 
after that, and Wachsmuth agrees with him. This seems to me to be unnecessary. 

208 That is, pure Providence unmixed with Necessity and Fate. 

209 That is, because of Providence, the law of heaven. 

210 ainov. 

211 The text is hopeless, being simply: sifj.aQfj.svr] 8 e, Sioti xai avayxr]. 

212 That is, the Seven Spheres. 

213 Cf. Exx. x., xi., xii. 


- 38 - 



EXCERPT XIV. 
OF SOUL [I.] 


(Title from Patrizzi (p. 40); preceded by “Of Thrice-greatest Hermes,” and 
followed by “To the Same Ammon.” 

Text: Stob., Phys., xxxv. 9, under heading: “Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to 
Ammon”; G. pp. 282, 283; M. i. 196, 197; W. 281, 282. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. iii. of “Fragments of the Books of Hermes to Ammon,” pp. 
259, 260.) 

/. THE Soul is further [in itself] incorporal essence, and even when in body 
it by no means doth depart from the essentiality peculiar to itself 

Its nature is, according to its essence to be for ever moving according to its 
thought [to be] self motive [purely], not moved in something nor towards 
something nor [yet] because of something 

For it is prior [to them] in power, and prior stands not in any need of 
consequents. 

“In something” furthermore, — means space, and time, and nature; 
“towards something ” — [this] means harmony, and form, and figure; 
“because of something”- — this means body, for ’tis because of body that 
there is time, and space, and nature. 

Now all these things are in connection with each other by means of a 
congenital relationship. 

2. For instance, now, the body must have space, for it would be past all 
contriving that a body should exist without a space. 

It changes, too, in nature, and ’tis impossible for change to be apart from 
time, and from the movement nature makes; nor is it further possible for 
there to be composing of a body apart from harmony. 

It is because of body, then, that space exists; for that by its reception of the 
changes of the body, it does not let a thing that’s changing pass away. 

Tut, changing it doth alternate from one thing to another, and is deprived 
of being in a permanent condition, but not of being body. 

For body, qua body, remains body; but any special moment of its state does 
not remain. 

The body, then, keeps changing in its states. 


- 39 - 



3. A nd so, space is incorporal, and tune, and natural motion; but each of 
these has naturally its own peculiar property. 

The property of space is receptivity; of tune [’tis] interval and number; of 
nature [it is] motion; of harmony [’tis] love; of body, change. 

The special nature of the Soul, hoivever, is essential thought 214 . 

EXCERPT XV. 

[OF SOUL, II.] 

(Patrizzi (p. 40) runs this on to the preceding without a break. 

Text: Stob., Phys., xxxv. 7, under heading: “Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to 
Ammon”; G. pp. 291 , 292; M. i. 203, 204; W. i. 289, 290. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. iv. of “Fragments of the Books of Hermes to Ammon,” pp. 
261,262.) 

1 . THAT which is moved is moved according to the operation of the motion 
that doth move the all. 

Tor that the Nature of the all supplies the all with motion, — one [motion 
being] the [one] according to its 215 Power, the other that according to [its] 
Operation 216 . 

The former doth extend itself throughout the whole of Cosmos, and holdeth 
it together from within; the latter doth extend itself [around it], and 
encompasseth it from without. And these go everywhere together through all 
things. 

Now the [Productive] Nature 217 of all things supplies the things produced 
with [power of re-] production, solving the seeds of its own self, [and] 
having its becomings 218 by means of moving matter. 

2. And Matter being moved was heated and did turn to Fire and 
Water, — the one [being] strong and active, and the other passive. 

And Fire opposed by Water was dried up by it, and did become Earth 
borne on Water. 

And when it was excessively dried up~~ , a vapour rose from out the 
three, — from Water, Earth and Fire, — and became Air. 

214 Or thinking according to essence, — r| xax’ oualav vor]ai?. 

215 Sc. Nature’s. 

216 Or energy. 

217 cpuai? simply; but as there is a play in the original on the words cpucrig, tpuouaa, tpurjv, and (puopsvoi?, I have tried to 
retain it in translation by a series of allied words. 

218 ysvsosig. 


- 40 - 



The [Four] ca?ne into congress ; [then,] according to the reason of the 
Harmony 221 ' , — hot with cold, [and] dry with moist. 

And from the union 222 of these four] is spirit horn, and seed proportionate 
to the surrounding Spirit. 

This [spirit] falling in the wo?nb does not remain inactive in the seed, hut 
being active it transforms the seed, and [this] being [thus] transformed, 
develops growth and siye. 

And as it grows in siye, it draws unto itself a copy of a model 223 , and is 
modelled. 

3. And on the model is the form supported, — by means of which that 
which is represented by an image is so represented. 

Now, since the spirit in the womb had not the ?notion that ?naintaineth life, 
but that which causeth fermentation 224 [only] , the Harmony composed the 
latter as the receptacle of rational life . 

This [life] is indivisible and changeless; it never changes from its 
changelessness. 

It 22, ruleth the conception of the thing within the womb, by ?neans of 
numbers, delivereth it, and bringeth it into the outer air. 

The Souf 28 dwells very near to it 229 ; — not owing to some common property, 
but under the constraint of Fate; for that it has no love to be with body 230 . 

Wherefore, [the Harmony 231 ] according unto Fate doth furnish to the thing 
that’s born [its] 232 rational motion, and the intellectual essence of the life 
itself. 

For that [this 233 ] doth insinuate itself into the spirit, and set it moving with 
the motion of the life 234 . 


219 Sc. Fire. 

220 7tegii;r]Qaivo(jiivou. 

221 Or law of Harmony, — Kara xOv rrjg agpovia? Xdyov. 

222 Lit. “breathing with one breath,” — ex irjg aufjwtvoia? — a wordplay on Ttveupa (spirit). For “spirit,” cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 
13, Comment., and Exx. xix. 3; iv. 2. 

223 Or image of a figure, — si'SwXov . . . ayf] ( juxto?. 

224 tf|v 8 e Pgacroxtiv. 

225 Or vehicle, — UTtoSo^tiv. 

226 rug 8iavot]Tixfj<; Cwfj?, — of the purposive rational life, otherwise called the Harmony. 

227 Sc. the Harmony. 

228 Reading ijnjyr| for ijjuyfj. 

229 The new-born babe. 

230 Compare Plutarch, Frag., v. 9 (ed. Didot): “For you should know the intercourse and the conjunction of the soul 
with body is contrary to nature.” 

231 It is not easy to disentangle the subjects of some of the above clauses. 

232 Sc. the thing’s. 


-41 - 




COMMENTARY 


Patrizzi is evidently at fault in running this on to Ex. xiv. without a break. The 
subject again is not so much “Of Soul” as “Of Conception and Birth,” but as the 
general exposition falls in very well with the nature of the subjects treated in Exx. 
xiv. and xvi., we may keep the same general title, though we may be quite certain 
that it was not that of the original. 

The exposition in § 2 is reminiscent of an apocalyptic style, and seems to be a 
Greek overworking of Egyptian ideas; for though the details are different and the 
precise meaning difficult to disentangle, the general point of view may be compared 
with the embryonic stages of incarnation given in the Pistis Sophia (pp. 344 ff.). 

THE EMBRYONIC STAGES OF INCARNATION 

“Then the Rulers summon the workmen of their ceons, to the number of 
three hundred and sixty-five, and hand over to them the soul and the 
countefeit of the spirit bound together, the one to the other, the countefeit of 
the spirit being outside the soul, and the compound of the power within the 
soul being inside both, that they may hold together. 

“(345) And the Rollers give commandment to the workmen, saying: This 
is the type which ye shall set in the body of the matter of the world Set ye 
the compound of the power which is in the soul within all of them, that they 
may hold together, for it is their support, and outside the soul place the 
counte feit of the spirit. ’ This is the order which they have given to their 
ivorkmen, that they may set the antitypes in bodies. 

“Following this plan the ivorkmen of the Raders bring the power, the soul 
and the countefeit of the spirit, and pour them all three into the world, 
passing through the wo rld of the Rollers of the Midst. 

‘The Rollers of the Midst also inspect the countefeit of the spirit and also 
the destiny. The latter, whose name is the destiny, leadeth on a man until it 
hath him killed by the death which is destined for him. This the Rollers of 
the Great Fate have bound to the soul, 

“And the workmen of the Sphere bind the soul with the power, with the 
countefeit of the spirit and with the destiny. And the whole is divided so as 
to form two parts, to surround the man and also the woman in the world, 
in whom the sign hath been set for them to be sent unto them. (346) And 
they give one part to the man and the other to the woman in the food of the 


233 Sc. the rational movement. 

234 Cwxixra?, — this may perhaps have some reference to the circle of lives, or the zodiac. 


- 42 - 




world, either in the aery, or watery, or etheric substance which they imbibe. . 

‘Now, therefore, when the workmen of the Rulers have cast one part into 
the woman and the other into the man in the manner which I have just 
related, even though [the pair] be removed to a great distance from one 
another, the workmen compel them secretly to be united together in the 
union of the world. Then the counterfeit of the spirit which is in the male 
cometh unto the part [of itself] which hath been sent into the world in the 
matter of the body [of the man], and sacrficeth it and casteth it into the 
womb of the woman, a deposit of the seed of iniquity. And forthwith the 
three hundred and sixty-five workmen of the Rulers enter into her, to take 
up their abode in her. The workmen of the tivo parts are all there together. 

“(347) And the workmen check the blood that cometh from all the 
nourishment that the woman eateth or drinketh, and keep it in the womb 
of the woman for forty days. And after forty days, they work the blood 
[that cometh] from the essence of all the nourishment, and work it together 
carefully in the woman ’s womb. 

“After forty days they spend another thirty days in building its members in 
the likeness of the body of a man; each buildeth a member. I will tell you of 
the decans who thus build [the body] . . . when I explain the emanation of 
the plerdma. 

“Aftenvards, when the workmen have completed the body entirely with all 
its members in seventy days, they summon into the body which they have 
builded, first the countefeit of the spirit, next they summon the soul within 
those, and finally they summon the compound of the power within the soul, 
and the destiny they place outside all, for it is not blended with them, but 
followeth after and accompanied] them. ” 

(An elaborate account of the “sealing” of the members of the plasm is then 
given.) 

“And when the number of the months of the child’s conception is full, the 
babe is born, the compound of the power being small in it, the soul being 
small in it, and the counterfeit of the spirit being small in it; whereas the 
destiny, being vast, is not mingled with the body, according to the regulation 
of the three (350), but followed] after the soul, the body and the countefeit 
of the spirit, until the soul passeth from the body according to the type of 
death whereby he shall die according to what hath been decreed unto him by 
the Reuters of the Great Tate. ” 


- 43 - 



EXCERPT XVI. 

[OF SOUL, III.] 

(I have added die tide, Patrizzi (p. 40b) having only the heading: “To the Same 
Ammon.” 

Text: Stob., Phjs., xli. 3, under the simple heading: “Of Hermes”; G. pp. 323, 324; 
M. i. 227, 228; W.i. 320,321. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. v. of “Fragments of the Books of Hermes to Ammon,” pp. 
263, 264.) 

/. THE Soul is, then, incorporal essence; for if it should have body, it 
would no longer have the power of being self maintained. 235 

Tor every body needeth being ; it needeth also ordered life 236 as well. 

<-) 2~7 *") 2 Q 

For that for every thing that comes to birth , change also must succeed. 

For that which doth become, 239 becomes in siye; for in becoming it hath 
increase. 

Again, for every thing that doth increase, decrease succeedeth; and on 
increase destruction. 

For, sharing in the form of life 240 , it 241 lives; it shares, also, in being 
through the Soul, 

2. Tut that which is the cause of being to another, is being first itself. 

And by [this] “being” I now mean becoming in reason, and taking part in 
intellectual life. 

It is the Soul that doth supply this intellectual life. 

It is called living 42 through the life, and rational through the intellect, and 
mortal through the body. 

Soul is, accordingly, a thing incorporal, possessing [in itself the power of 
freedom from all change. 


235 Or of saving itself. 

236 rfp ta^si xsipsvr]?, — lit. life set, or placed, in order (as distinguished from intellectual life), that is, 
presumably, sensible or cosmic life. 

237 Or has becoming, or genesis. 

238 Or follow. 

239 Or is born. 

240 si'Sou? £tofp, — that is, formal life, or life set in order. 

241 Sc. body, or that which comes to birth. 

242 Coov (subs.) according to Gaisford, — that is, an animal; but I prefer ((wov (adj.), taking it with the following 
koyiKOv and 6 vt]t6v. 


- 44 - 



For how would it be possible to talk about an intellectual living thing 43 , if 
that there were no [living] essence to furnish life? 

Nor, any more, would it be possible to say a rational [living] thing were 
there no ratiocinative essence to furnish intellectual life. 

3. It is not to all [lives] that intellect extends; [it doth depend] on the 
relationship of body ’s composition to the Harmony. 

For if the hot in the compost be in excess, he's light 244 and fervid; but if the 
cold, he’s heaiy and he’s dull. 

For Nature makes the composition fit the Harmony. 

There are three forms of the becoming — the hot, the cold, and medium. 

id 45 makes it fit according to the ruling Star 46 in the star-mixture. 

And Soul receiving it 247 , as Fate decrees, supplies this work of Nature 
with [the proper kind of life. 

Nature, accordingly, assimilates the body’s harmony unto the mixture of 
the Stars, and co-unites its complex mixtures with their Harmony, so that 
they are in mutual sympathy. 

For that the end of the Stars’ Harmony is to give birth to sympathy 
according to their Fate. 


EXCERPT XVII. 

[OF SOUL, IV.] 

(Patrizzi (p. 41) runs this on to the preceding without a break. 

Text: Stob., Phys., xli. 4, under heading: “Of the Same” — that is, “Of Hermes”; G. 
pp. 324, 325; M. i. 228, 229; W. i. 321, 322. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. vi. of “Fragments of the Book of Hermes to Ammon,” pp. 
265, 266.) 

1 . SOUL, Ammon, then, is essence containing its own end within itself; in 
[its] beginning taking to itself the way of life allotted it by Fate, it draws 


243 Or animal. 

244 xoutpo? (mas.), — the subject is, therefore, man, the rational animal. 

245 Sc. Nature. 

246 Or, presumably, planetary sphere. 

247 Sc. the body-compost. 


-45 - 



also unto itself a reason like to matter, possessing “heart” and 

<( .. /•/ >>248 

appetite. 

“Heart, ” too, is matter; if it doth make its state accordant with the Soul’s 
intelligence, it, [then,] be cometh courage, and is not led away by cowardice. 

And “appetite” is matter, too; if it doth make its state accord with the 
Soul’s rational power, it [then] be cometh temperance, and is not moved by 
pleasure, for reasoning fills up the “appetite’s” deficiency. 

2. And iv hen both [these] 249 are harmonised, and equalised, and both are 
made subordinate to the Soul’s rational power, justice is born. 

For that their state of equilibrium doth take away the “heart’s” excess, 
and equalises the deficiency of “appetite. ” 

The source of these , however, is the penetrating essence of all thought, 
its self by its own self [working] in its own reason that doth think round 

23 2 233 

everything , with its own reason as its rule. 

It is the essence that doth lead and guide as ruler; its reason is as ’twere its 
counsellor who thinks about all things. 254 

3. The reason of the essence, then, is gnosis of those reasonings which 
furnish the irrational [part] with reasoning’s conjecturing 5 , — a faint thing 
as compared with reasoning [itself, but reasoning as compared with the 
irrational, as echo unto voice, and moonlight to the sun. 

And “heart” and “appetite” are harmonised upon a rational plan; they 
pull the one against the other, and [so] they learn to know in their own 
selves a circular intent. 256 


EXCERPT XVIII. 
[OF SOUL, V.] 

(Patrizzi (p. 41) runs this on to the last without a break. 


248 In a metaphorical sense, — 0ufji6v xoci ETuOupia; terms originally belonging to a primitive stage of culture, and often 
translated “anger and concupiscence” — positive and negative, denoting the “too much” and the “too little” of the 
animal nature, and to he paralleled with the vou? and Eravoia of the rational nature. Cf. Ex. i. 5 and xviii. 3. 

249 Sc. virtues, — courage and temperance. 

250 Sc. two virtues. 

251 r| Siavor]Tixf] oltala, — that is, the essence which penetrates, or pervades, all things by means of thought. 

252 sv tco auifjg Ttegivorpixca ^oycp. 

253 Or power, or ruling principle. 

254 6 7iegivor]Tix6?. 

255 sixaafjiov. 

256 Siavoia. 


- 46 - 



Text: Stob., Rhys., xli. 5, under heading: “Of the Same” — that is, “Of Hermes”; G. 
pp. 325-327; M. i. 229, 230; W. i. 322-324. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. vii. of “Fragments of the Books of Hermes to Ammon,” 
pp. 267, 268.) 

/. [NOW], every Soul is free from death and in perpetual motion. 

For in the General Sermons 257 ive have said some motions are by means of 
the activities 258 , others are owing to the bodies. 

We say, moreover, that the Soul’s produced out of a certain essence, — not a 
matter, — incorporal itself, just as its essence is. 

Now every thing that’s born, must of necessity be born from something. 

All things, moreover, in which destruction followeth on birth, must of 
necessity have two kinds of motion with them: — the [motion] of the Soul, 
by which they’re moved; and body’s [motion], by which they wax and ivane. 

Moreover, also, on the former’s dissolution, the latter 59 is dissolved. 

This I define, [then,] as the motion of bodies corruptible. 

2. The Soul, however, is in perpetual motion, — in that perpetually it moves 
itself, and makes [its] motion active [too] in other things. 

And so, according to this reason, every Soul is free from death, having for 
motion the making active of itself. 

The kinds of Souls are three: — divine, [and] human, [and] irrational. 

Now the divine [is that] of its divine body, in which there is the making 
active of itself. For it is moved in it, and moves itself. 

For when it is set free from mortal lives, it separates itself from the 
irrational portions of itself, departs unto the godlike body, and as ’tis in 
pepetual motion, is moved in its own self, with the same motion as the 
universe. 

3. The human [kind] has also something of the godlike [body], but it has 
joined to it as well the [parts] irrational, — the appetite and heart. 260 

These latter also are immortal, in that they happen also in themselves to be 
activities; but [they are] the activities of mo rtal bodies. 


257 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 1 and 7; xiii. (xiv.) 1; and Ex. ix. 1. 

258 Or energies. 

259 The former is here the body; the latter, the motion of waxing and waning. 

260 Cf. Ex. xvii. 


- 47 - 



Wherefore, they are removed far from the godlike portion of the Soul, ivhen 
it is in its godlike body; but when this enters in a mortal frame, they~ 
also cling to it, and by the presence [of these elements] it keeps on being a 
human Soul, 

But that of the irrationals consists of heart and appetite. And for this cause 
these lives are also called irrational, through deprivation of the reason of the 
Soul, 

4. You may consider, too, as a fourth [kind] that of the soulless, which 
from without 263 the bodies operates in them, and sets them moving. 

But this should [really] be the moving of itself within its godlike body, and 
the moving of these [other] things as it were by the way. 

COMMENT 

The mention of the General Sermons (§ 1) raises the question as to whether or no 
our extract may not be from one of the Sermons to Tat, for in all other cases these 
General Sermons are referred to in the Tat- literature. The contents, however, are so 
similar to the extracts from the Sermons to Ammon that we keep this excerpt with 
them. 


EXCERPT XIX. 

[OF SOUL, VI.] 

(Patrizzi (p. 41b) runs this on to the last without a break. 

Text: Stob., Phys., xli. 6, under heading: “Of the Same” — that is, “Of Hermes”; G. 
pp. 327, 328; M. i. 229, 230; W. i. 324, 325. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. viii. of “Fragments of the Books of Hermes to Ammon,” 
pp. 269, 270.) 

/. SOUL, then, is an eternal intellectual essence, having for purpose 264 the 
reason of itself; and ivhen it thinks with 265 [it ,] 266 it doth attract [unto 
itself the Harmony’s intention . 267 

But when it leaves behind the body Nature makes 26 * ' , it bideth in and by 
itself, — the maker of itself in the noetic 69 world. 


261 Sc. the divine part. 

262 The irrational parts. 

263 The other kinds presumably operating in bodies from within. 

264 voripa. 

265 auvvoouaa. 

266 Sc. the reason. 

267 Siavoiav. 

268 Lit. the physical body. 


- 48 - 



It ruleth its oivn reason, bearing in its own thought 270 a motion (called by 
the name of life) like unto [that of] that which cometh into life. 271 

2. Fo r that the thing peculiar to the Soul [is this], — to furnish other things 
with what is like its own peculiarity. 

There are, accordingly, two lives, two motions : — one, that according to the 
essence of the Soul; the other, that according to the nature of the body. 

The former [is] more general, [the latter is more partial]; the [life] that is 
according unto essence has no authority but its own self, the other [is] under 
necessity. 

For every thing that’s moved, is under the necessity of that which moveth 
[it]. 

The motion that doth move, however, is in close union with the love of the 
noetic essence. 

For Soul must be incorporal, — essence that hath no share in any body 
Nature makes. 

For were it corporal, it would have neither reason nor intelligence. 272 

For every body is without intelligence; but when it doth receive of essence, it 
doth obtain the power of being a breathing animal. 

3. The spirit 273 [hath the power to contemplate] the body; the reason of the 
essence hath the power to contemplate the Beautiful. 

The sensible — the spirit — is that which can discern appearances. It is 
distributed into the various sense-organs 274 ; a part of it becometh spirit by 
means of which we see 273 , [a part] by means of which we hear, [a part] by 
means of which we smell, [a part] by means of which we taste, [a part] by 
means of which we touch. 

This spirit, when it is led upwards by the understanding, discerns that 
which is sensible 276 ; but if ’tis not, it only maketh pictures for itself 

Fo r it is of the body, and that, too, receptible of all [impressions]. 


269 This might here be translated “the self-purposive,” to pick up the word-play on vorjpLa and Siavoia. 

270 Or purpose, — vofipati. 

271 That is, presumably, of the same nature as the motion of the soul in incarnation or perhaps of the animal soul. 

272 voT]aiv. 

273 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 13, Comment.; and Exx. xv. 2, iv. 2. 

274 Lit. organic senses; cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 17. 

275 Lit. spirituous sight. 

276 That is, the sensible or phenomenal world. 


- 49 - 




4. The reason of the essence ; on the other hand \ is that which is possessed of 
judgment. 2, ' 

The knowledge of things worthy [to be known] is co-existent with the 
reason; [that which is coexistent] with the spirit [is] opinion. 

The latter has its operation from the surrounding world; the former ; from 
itself. 


COMMENT 

As Exx. xvi.-xix. follow one another in Stobasus, it is highly probable that they are 
all taken from the same group of sermons, and as their contents are so similar to 
those of Exx. xiv. and xv., and these are stated by S to Ecus to be from the 
“Sermons to Ammon,” we are fairly justified in grouping them all together. How 
many Sermons to Ammon there may have been in the collection used by Stobteus 
we have no means of knowing; they may also perhaps have had no distinctive title; 
but as Stobteus usually leaves out the titles in quoting, even when we know them 
from other sources, there is no definite conclusion to be drawn from his silence. 

EXCERPT XX. 

[THE POWER OF CHOICE] 

(Patrizzi (p. 42) runs this on to Ex. xix. without a break. 

Text: Stob., Ethica, vii. 31, under heading: “Of Hermes”; G. (ii.) pp. 654, 655; M. ii. 
100, 101; W.ii. 160, 161. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. i. of “Fragments Divers,” pp. 271, 272.) 

THERE is, then, essence, reason, th ought, ~ ' perception: 

Opinion and sensation move towards perception; reason directs itself 
towards essence; and thought sends itself forth through its own self 

And thought is interwoven with perception, and entering into one another 
they become one form, — which is that of the Soul [itself. 

Opinion and sensation move towards the Soul’s perception; but they do not 
remain in the same state. Hence is there excess, and falling short, and 
difference with the?n. 

When they are drawn away from the perception, they deteriorate; but when 
they follow it and are obedient, they share in the perceptive reason through 
the sciences. 280 


277 TO (pgOVOUV. 

278 vor|fji.a. 

279 Siavoia. 


- 50 - 



2. We have the power to choose ; it is within our power to choose the better, 
and in like way [to choose] the worse, according to our will. 281 

And if [our] choice clings to the evil things, it doth consort with the 
corporeal nature; [and] for this cause Fate rules o'er him who makes this 
choice. 

Since, then, the intellectual essence 282 in us is absolutely free, — [namely] the 
reason that embraces all in thought, — and that it ever is a law unto itself 
and self identical, on this account Fate does not reach it. 283 

Thus furnishing it first from the First God, it 284 sent forth the perceptive 
reason, and the whole reason which Nature hath appointed unto them that 
come to birth. 

With these the Soul consorting, consorteth with their fates, though [in 
herself she hath no part [or lot] in their fates' nature. 

(Patriot p. 42) adds the following to the preceding r ; it is not found in Stobaus, and appears to be a scholium.) 

What is necessitated by the interwoven harmony 285 of [all] the parts, in no 
way differs from that which is fated. 

COMMENT 

I have supplied a temporary heading for the sake of uniformity. Our extract, 
however, seems to be taken from a lengthy treatise, and was probably one of the 
Sermons to Tat. 


EXCERPT XXL 
OF ISIS TO HORUS 

(Title in Patrizzi (p. 45) is “From Isis.” 

Text: Stob., Flor., xiii. 50, under the heading: “Of Hermes from the [Sermon] of Isis 
to Homs”; G. i. 328; M. i. 265; H. iii. 467. 

Schow gives another heading, which Gaisford (in a note) thinks is from the Vienna 
codex, namely: “Of Hermes from the Intercession (or Supplication, — npsa(3stoc<;) 
of Isis.” 286 


280 8ia tcov (j.a6r](ji.aTwv. 

281 Reading sxouaiw? for the meaningless axoucriw? of the text. 

282 Reading vot](jiaTixr] with Patrizzi, instead of awpaTixri as with G. W. prefers aowpaxo? (incorporal). 

283 Sc. the reason. 

284 The Soul, or intellectual essence. The text is very obscure, and Wachsmuth does not seem to have improved it. Cf. 
C. H., xii. (xiii.) 8. 

285 Lit. interweaving. 

286 R. (p. 134, n. 3) says simply that the last word (“Horns”) is missing in the Vindobonensis, and finds no difficulty 
in recognizing a type of literature in which King (Ammon) is a pupil of Isis. 


-51 - 




Menard, Livre IV., No. ii. of “Fragments Divers,” p. 272.) 

A REFUTATION , when it is recognised, 0 greatest King, carries the man 
who is refuted towards the desire of things he did not knoiv before. 

COMMENT 

This fragment is clearly not in the style of the excerpt from the “Sermon of Isis to 
Hermes” (Ex. xxvii.); it is far more closely reminiscent of C. H., xvi. or xvii., and is, 
therefore, probably from the Sermon of Asclepius to the King. 

EXCERPT XXII. 

[AN APOPHTHEGM] 


(Text: W., i. 34, 5.) 

HERMES on being asked, What is God? — replied: The Demiurge of 
wholes, — the Mind most wise and everlasting. 

EXCERPT XXIII. 

FROM “APHRODITE” 

(Title in Patrizzi (p. 45) is “The Likeness of Children,” followed by: “From 
Aphrodite.” 

Text: Stob., Phys., xxxvi. 2, under heading: “Of Hermes from ‘Aphrodite’”; G. pp. 
297, 298; M. i. 207, 208; W. i. 295, 296. 

Menard, Livre IV., No. iii. of “Fragments Divers,” p. 273.) 

/ ] How, [then,] are offspring born like to their parents? Or how are 

they returned 187 to [their own] species? 288 

[Aphrodite] I will set forth the reason. When generation stores up seed 
from the ripe blood being sweated forth 289 , it comes to pass that somehoiv 
there’s exhaled from the ivhole mass 290 of limbs a certain essence, folloiving 
the law of a divine activity, as though the man himself were being born; the 
same thing also in the woman ’s case apparently takes place. 

When, then, what floweth from the ?nan hath the ascendancy, and keeps 
intact, the young one’s brought to light resembling its sire; contrary wise, in 
the same way, [ resembling] its dam. 


287 otTioSiSoxat, — referring, presumably, to the idea of metempsychosis. 

288 Or families. 

289 EijatpeSgoupivou. But W. has E^acpgoopsvou (turned into foam), following the emendation of Usener, based on 
Clem. Al. Padqgog., I, vi. 48. 

290 Lit. body. 


- 52 - 



Moreover, if there should be ascendancy of any part, [then] the resemblance 
[of the young] mil favour that [especial] part. 

But sometimes also for long generations the offspring favoureth the 
husband’s form, because his decan has the greater influence 291 at that 
[particular] moment when the wife conceives. 

COMMENT 

This fragment belongs to a type of Hermetic literature of which it is the sole 
surviving specimen. It is in form identical with the Isis and Horns type; but what 
the name of the questioner of Aphrodite could have been is difficult to say. 

EXCERPT XXIV. 

[A HYMN OF THE GODS] 

(Text: Stob., Phys., v. 14, under the simple heading: “Of Hermes”; G. p. 65 M. i. 45; 
W. i. 77. The same verses are read in the appendix to the Anthologia Palatina , p. 768, 
n. 40.) 

SEVEN Stars far varied in their course revolved upon the [wide] 
Olympian plain; with them for ever will Eternity ~ spin fate] : — Mene 
that shines by night, [and] gloomy Kronos, [and] sweet Helios, and Pap hie 
who ’s carried in the shrine 294 , courageous Ares, fair-winged Hermes, and 
Zeus the primal source 295 from whom Nature doth come. 

Now they themselves have had the race of men entrusted to their care; so 
that in us there is a Mene, Zeus, an Ares, Paphie, a Kronos, Helios and 
Hermes. 

Wherefore we are divided up [so as] to draw from the cetherial spirit 296 , 
tears, laughter, anger, birth, reason, sleep, desire. 

Pears are Kronos, birth Zeus, reason [is] Hermes, courage Mars, and 
Mene sleep, in sooth, and Cytherea desire, and Helios [is] laughter — for 
’tis because of him that justly every mortal thinking thing doth laugh and 
the immortal world. 


291 Xoyov. 

292 Or iEon. 

293 eravrjCTSTai. But the Anthology reads “xod totaiv aei xavoviCexai” — that is to say, Eternity or iEon is for ever 
regulated or measured by the Seven; which seems to have no sense unless it means that the Seven are the 
instruments, whereby Eternity is divided into time. 

294 That is, Venus, the image of whom was, presumably, carried in a small shrine in processions. 

293 aQxiysvsQXoq. 

296 Meaning the one element or ether simply. 


- 53 - 



COMMENT 


This is the only known specimen of verses attributed to the Trismegistic tradition. 
Liddell and Scott, however, under “vuxTupocvqq,” do not question this attribution, 
while Clement of Alexandria {Strom., vi. p. 633 [this is a reference of Wachsmuth’s 
which I cannot verify]) praises the “Hymns of the Gods” of Hermes. On the 
contrary, in Anthol Veil at., p. 442, n. 491, the seventh verse is ascribed to Theon of 
Alexandria. 


EXCERPT XXV. 

THE VIRGIN OF THE WORLD [I .] 297 

(Title in Patrizzi (p. 27b), in the Latin translation, “Minerva Mundi.” 2ys 

Text: Stob., Phys., xli. 44, under heading: “From Thrice-Greatest Hermes’ Sacred 
Book ‘The Virgin of the World’”; G. pp. 395-419; M. i. 281-298; W. i. 385-407. 

Menard, Livre III., No. i. of “Fragments of the Sacred Book entitled ‘The Virgin of 
the World, ”’pp. 177-200.) 


1 . 299 SO speaking Isis doth pour forth for Horns the siveet draught (the 
first j of deathlessness m which souls have custom to receive from Gods, and 
thus begins her holiest discourse (logos): 

Seeing that, Son Horns, Heaven, adorned with many a wreath [of starry 
crowns], is set o’er every nature of [all] things beneath, and that nowhere it 
lacketh aught of anything which the whole cosmos now doth hold, — in every 
way it needs must be that every nature which lies underneath, should be co- 
ordered and full-filled by those that lie above; for things below cannot of 
course give order to the ordering above. 

It needs must, therefore, be the less should give place to the greater mysteries. 
The ordinance of the sublimer things transcends the lower; it is both sure in 
every way and falleth death no mortal’s thought. Wherefore the [mysteries] 
below did sigh, fearing the wondrous beauty and the everlasting durance of 
the ones above, 


297 Or “Apple of the Eye of the World” — see Commentary. Referred to as K. K., — i.e. Kogr] Koopou. 

298 Curiously enough, though the page-headings throughout have “Minerva Mundi,” the heading of p. 28 still stands 
“Pupilla Mundi” — showing that Patrizzi himself was puzzled how to translate the Greek, and had probably in the 
first place translated it throughout “Pupilla Mundi,” or “Apple of the Eye of the World.” In his Introduction (p. 3), 
however, Patrizzi writes: “But there is extant also another [book of Hermes] with the title of ‘The Sacred Book,’ 
which we found in Cyprus, in a monastery called Enclistra, at the same time as the rest of the books, and which John 
Stobteus has inserted in his Physical Eclogues together with other fragments.” This would seem to suggest that 
Patrizzi had seen the original Sermon, and that its main title was “The Sacred Book.” 

299 I have numbered the paragraphs for convenience of reference. 

300 to TigcoTov ctp(3goola?. 


- 54 - 



T. was worth the gaging] 01 and the pains to see Heaven’s beauty, beauty 
that seemed like God, — God who was yet unknown, and the rich majesty 
of Night, who weaves her web with rapid light 302 , though it be less than 
Sun’s, and of the other mysteries 303 in turn that move in Heaven, with 
ordered motions and with periods of times, with certain hidden influences 304 
bestowing order on the things below and co-increasing them. 

2. Thus fear succeeded fear, and searching search incessant, and for so long 
as the Creator of the universals willed, did ignorance retain its grip on all, 
Tut when He judged it fit to manifest Him who He is, He breathed into 
the Gods the Hoves, and freely poured the splendouf 03 which He had 
within His heart, into their minds, in ever greater and still greater measure; 
that firstly they might have the wish to seek, next they might yearn to find, 
and finally have power to win success as well. Tut this, my Horns, wonder- 
worthy son, could never have been done had that seed 306 been subject to 
death, for that as yet had no existence, but only with a soul that could 
vibrate responsive to the mysteries of Heaven. 

3. Such iv as all-knowing Hermes, who saw all things, and seeing 
understood, and understanding had the power both to disclose and to give 
explanation. For what he knew, he graved on stone; yet though he graved 
them onto stone he hid them mostly, keeping sure silence though in speech, 
that every younger age of cosmic time might seek for them. And thus, with 
charge unto his kinsmen of the Gods to keep sure watch, he mounted to the 
Stars. 

To him succeeded Tat, who was at once his son and heir unto these 
knowledges; and not long afterwards Asclepius-Imuth, according to the will 
of Ptah who is Hephcestus 307 ’ , and all the rest who were to make enquiry of 
the faithful certitude of heavenly contemplation, as Foreknowledge 308 willed, 
Foreknowledge queen of all, 

4. Hermes, however, made explanation to surrounding [space], how that 
not even to his son (because of the yet newness of his youth) had he been 
able to hand on the Pefect Vision. Tut when the Sun did rise for me, and 


301 Or contemplation, Oswgia?. 

302 Sc. The weft and warp of stars. 

303 The planetary spheres. 

304 anoQOica, or emanations. Cf. R. 16, n. 4, for the conflation of the pure Egyptian emanation doctrine with 
astrological considerations. 

30s Radiance or light. 

306 Sc. the race of the Gods. 

307 For the restored text, see R. 122. 

308 Or Providence, tigovoia. 


- 55 - 



with all-seeing eyes I 309 ga^ed upon the hidden [mysteries] of that New 
Dawn, and contemplated them, slowly there came to me — hut it was 
sure — conviction that the sacred symbols of the cosmic elements were hid 
away hard by the secrets of Osiris. 

5. [Hermes], ere he returned to Heaven, invoked a spell on them, and 
spake these words. (For ’tis not meet, my son, that I should leave this 
proclamation ineffectual, hut [rather] should speak forth what words [our] 
Hermes uttered when he hid his hooks away.) Thus then he said: 

“O holy hooks, who have been made by my immortal hands, by 
incorruption ’s magic spells, . . f 10 free from decay throughout eternity 
remain and incorrupt from tune ! Become unseeable, unfmdable, for every 
one whose foot shall tread the plains of this [our] land, until old Heaven 
doth bring forth meet instruments for you, whom the Creator shall call 
souls. ” 

Thus spake he; and, laying spells on them by means of his own works, he 
shuts them safe away in their own %ones. And long enough the time has 
been since they were hid away. 311 

6. And Nature, O my son, was barren, till they who then were under 
orders to patrol the Heaven, approaching to the God of all, their Tang 
reported on the lethargy of things. The time was come for cosmos to awake, 
and this was no one’s task but His alone. 

“We pray Thee, then, ” they said, “direct Thy thought to things which now 
exist and to what things the future needs. ” 

7. When they spake thus, God smiled and said: ‘Nature, arise!” And 
from His ivord there came a marvel, feminine, possessed of pefect beauty, 
gating at which the Gods stood all-amazed. And God the Forefather, 
with name of Nature, honoured her, and bade her be prolific. 

Then gating fixedly on the surrounding space, He spake these words as 
well: “Fet Heaven be filled with all things full, and Air, and JFther too! 
“God spake and it was so. And Nature with herself communing knew she 
must not disregard the Sire’s command; so with the help of Toil she made a 
daughter fair, whom she did call Invention. And on hef 12 God bestowed 


309 The masculine is here used, the writer forgetting for the moment that he had assumed the person of Isis. 

31,1 The text is here again hopeless. Meineke’s emendation ( Adnot ., p. cxxx.) ac, . . . tpappaxco %giaa? stunga-up — which 
makes Hermes smear the books with some magical ointment — is ingenious, but hardly satisfactory, though 
Wachsmuth adopts it. 

311 This is purely conjectural; the text is utterly corrupt. 

312 Sc. Invention. 


- 56 - 



the gift of being and with His gift He set apart all them that had been so- 
far made ; filled them with mysteries, and to Invention gave the power of 
ruling them. 

8. But He, no longer willing that the world above should be inert, but 
thinking good to fill it full of breaths, so that its parts should not remain 
immotive and inert, He thus began on these 313 with use of holy arts as 
proper for the bringing forth of His own special work. 

For taking breath from His own Breath and blending this with knowing 
Fire 314 , He mingled them with certain other substances which have no 
power to know; and having made the two 3h — either with other — one, with 
certain hidden words of power, He thus set all the mixture going 
thoroughly; until out of the compost smiled a substance, as it were, far 
subtler, purer far, and more translucent than the things from which it came; 
it was so clear that no one but the Artist could detect it. 

9. And since it neither thawed when fire was set unto it for it was made of 
Fire), nor yet did freeze when it had once been properly produced for it was 
made of Breath), but kept its mixture's composition a certain special kind, 
peculiar to itself of special type and special blend, — (which composition, 
you must know, God called Psychosis, after the more auspicious meaning of 
the name and from the similarity of its behaviour 316 ) — it was from this 
coagulate He fashioned souls enough in myriads 317 , moulding with order 
and with measure the efflorescent product of the mixture for ivhat He 
willed, with skilled experience and fitting reason, so that they should not be 
compelled to differ any way one from another. 

10. For, you must know, the efflorescence that exhaled out of the movement 
God induced, was not like to itself. For that its first florescence was greater, 
fuller, every way more pure, than was its second; its second was far second 


313 Sc. the breaths or spirits. 

314 TiUg vos gov — a term in frequent use subsequently among the Later Platonists; cf. Porphyry, ap. Euseb., Prop. Ev., 
XV. xi. 16. 

315 Sc. the knowing and unknowing primal elements. Cf. P. S. A., vi. 

316 The text is very involved and obscure, and the meaning of the writer is by no means clear. Psychosis ((Jju^cooig) 
means either animation (quickening) or “making cold” (cf. ijiuxw an d t ] JU X (3w )> the name Psychosis is thus apparently 
supposed by the writer to have some connection with the term EtJjuxs (“freeze,” or grow cold), which he has just 
employed in his description of the behaviour of the mixture. In its less auspicious sense £ijiux s meant “grow cold”; in 
its more auspicious meaning it signified “breathe.” But even so it must be said that the further reason (viz., similarity 
of behaviour) given for the choice of the term Psychosis is the exact opposite of what is stated in the description of 
the soul-stuff s nature; and this is all the more puzzling when we recall the theory of Origen and his predecessors 
that the soul (4 | ux' 1 i) was so-called precisely because it had grown cold and fallen away from the Divine heat and life. 
With the term cf. the ocopaTwoig of Exx. viii. 5, vii. 2. 

317 Cf. Plato, Tim., 41: “He divided the whole mixture into souls equal in number to the stars, and assigned each soul 
to a star.” So also Philo, who speaks of the souls as “equal in number to the stars ” — De Som., i. § 22; M. 642, P. 586 
(Ri. iii. 244). 


- 57 - 



to the first, hut greater far than was its third 'f 8 And thus the total number 
of degrees reached up to sixty. 319 In spite of this, in laying down the law, 
He ordered it that all should be eternal, as though from out one essence, the 
forms of which Himself alone could bring to their completion. 

1 1 . Moreover, He appointed for them limits and reservations in the height 
of upper Mature 320 , that they might keep the cylinder^ 21 a-whirl in proper 
order and economy and [thus] might please their Sire. And so in that all- 
fairest station of the Mther He summoned unto Him the natures of all 
things that had as yet been made, and spake these words: 

“O Souls, ye children fair of Mine own Breath and My solicitude, whom I 
have now with My oivn Hands 322 brought to successful birth and consecrate 
to My own world, give ear unto these words of Mine as unto laws, and 
meddle not with any other space but that which is appointed for you by My 
will. 

‘Tor you, if ye keep steadfast, the Heaven, with the star-order, and thrones 
I have ordained full-filled with virtue, shall stay as noiv they are for you; 
but if ye shall in any way attempt some innovation contrary to My decrees, 
I swear to you by My most holy Breath, and by this mixture out of which I 
brought you into being, and by these Hands of Mine which gave you life 323 , 
that I will speedily devise for you a bond and punishments. ” 

12. And having said these words, the God, who is my Hord, mixed the 
remaining cognate elements (W ater and Earth 324 ) together, and, as before, 
invoking on them certain occult words, words of great power though not so 
potent as the first, He set them moving rapidly, and breathed into the 
mixture power of life; and taking the coagulate (which like the other floated 
to the top), when it had been well steeped and had become consistent, He 
modelled out of it those of the [sacred] animals 325 possessing forms like unto 
men ’s. 


318 Cf. Plato, ibid.: “They [the souls] were not, however, pure as before, but diluted to the second and third degrees. 

319 See § 56 below. 

320 Of the Nature Above (Tfjg avw tpuaew?); f. the “Jerusalem Above” of the “Gnostics.” Cf. also Tim., 41 D: “And 
having there [that is, among the stars] placed them as in a chariot, he showed them the nature of the universe, and 
declared to them the laws of destiny, according to which their first birth should be one and the same for all, — no one 
should suffer a disadvantage at his hands; they were to be sown in the instmments of time severally adapted to them, 
and to come forth the most religious of animals; and as human nature was of two kinds, the superior race would 
hereafter be called man.” With the last sentence, f. also 12 below. 

321 Cf. P. S. A., xix. 

322 Cf. § 31 below. 

323 Cf. Hermes-Prayer, iii. 3, and note. 

324 We have had previous mention of fire, (asther) and air, — the psychosis being the quintessence. 

325 These are presumably the types of life in the upper world, symbolized by the zodiac. 


- 58 - 



The mixtures’ residue He gave unto those souls that had gone in advance 
and had been summoned to the lands of Gods, to regions near the Stars, 
and to the [choir of] holy da im ones. He said: 

13. “My sons, ye children of My Nature, fashion things l Take ye the 
residue of what My art hath made, and let each fashion something which 
shall bear resemblance to his own nature. These will I further give to you as 
models. ” 

He took and set in order fair and fine, agreeably to the motions of the 
souls, the world of sacred animals, appending as it were to those resembling 
men those which came next in order ; and on these types of lives He did 
bestow the all-devising powers and all-contriving procreative breath of all the 
things which were for ever generally to be. 

And He withdrew, with promises to join unto the visible productions of 
their hands breath that cannot be seen 326 , and essence of engendering its like 
to each, so that they might give birth to others like themselves. And these 
are under no necessity to do aught else than what they did at first. 

14. [And Horns asked:] 

What did the souls do, mother, then ? 

And Isis said: 

Taking the blend of matter, Horus, son, they first looked at the Father’s 
mixture and adored it, and tried to find out whence it was composed; but 
this was not an easy thingfor them to know. 

They then began to fear lest they should fall beneath the Father’s wrath for 
trying to find out, and so they set to work to do what they were bid. 

Thereon, out of the upper stuff which had its topmost layer superfluously 
light, they formed the race of birds; while they were doing this the mixture 
had become half-hardened, and by this time had taken on a firm 
consistency — thereon they fashioned out the race of things which have four 
feet; [ next they did fashion forth] the race of fish — less light and needing a 
moist substance of a different kind to swim in; and as the residue was of a 
cold and heavy nature, from it the Souls devised the race of creeping things. 

15. They then, my son, as though they had done something grand, with 
over-busy daring armed themselves, and acted contrary to the commands 
they had received; and forthwith they began to overstep their proper limits 


326 So Meineke in notes, following Cantor, — instead of the traditional “visible.” 


- 59 - 



and their reservations, and would no longer stay in the same place, hut were 
for ever moving, and thought that being ever stationed in one place was 
death. 

That they would do this thing, however, O my son (as Hermes says when 
he speaks unto me), had not escaped the Eye of Him who is the God and 
Lord of universal things; and He searched out a punishment and bond, the 
which they now in misery endure. 

Thus was it that the Sovereign King of all resolved to fabricate with art the 
human frame, in order that in it the race of Souls throughout might be 
chastised. 

16. ‘Then sending for me,” Hermes says, “He spake: ‘Soul of My Soul, 
and holy mind of My oivn Mind 327 , up to what point, the nature of the 
things beneath, shall it be seen in gloom ? How long shall what has up to 
now been made remain inactive and be destitute of praise l Bring hither to 
Me now, My son, all of the Gods in Heaven, ’ said God” — as Hermes 
saith. 

And when they came obedient to His command , — ‘Hook down, ” said He, 
“upon the Earth, and all beneath. ” And they forthwith both looked and 
understood the Sovereign’s will. And when He spake to them on human 
kind’s behalf, they [all] agreed to furnish those who were to be, with 
whatsoever thing they each could best provide. 

17. Sun said: ‘Til shine unto my full, ” 

Moon promised to pour light upon the after-the-sun course, and said she 
had already given birth to Tear, and Silence, and also Sleep, and 
Memory — a thing that ivould turn out to be most useful for them. 328 

Cronus announced himself already sire of justice and Necessity. 

Zeus said: “So that the race which is to be may not for ever fight, already 
for them have I made Fortune, and Hope, and Peace. ” 

Ares declared he had become already sire of Struggle, Wrath, and Strife. 

Nor yet did Aphrodite hesitate; she also said: ‘Til join to them Desire, my 
Eord, and Bliss, and Daughter [too], so that our kindred souls, in 
working out their very grievous condemnation, may not exhaust their 
punishment unto the full, ” 

Full pleased were all, my son, at Aphrodite’s words. 


327 Cf. Cyril, 15 (Frag. xvi.). 

328 Cf. Plat. Crit, 108. 


- 60 - 



“And for my part,” said Hermes, “I will make men’s nature well 
endowed; I will devote to them Prudence and Wisdom, Persuasiveness and 
Truth, and never will I cease from congress with Invention, hut ever will I 
benefit the mortal life of men horn underneath my types of life. 329 For that 
the types our Father and Creator hath set apart for me, are types of 
wisdom and intelligence, and more than ever [is this so] what time the 
motion of the Stars set over them doth have the natural power of each 
consonant with itself ” 

18. And God, the Master of the universe, rejoiced on hearing this, and 
o rdered that the race of men should he. 

“I, ” Hermes says, “was see king for the stuff which had to he employed, and 
calling on the Monarch for His aid. And He gave order to the Souls to 
give the mixture’s residue; and taking it I found it utterly dried up. 

‘ Thereon , in mixing it, I used more water far than was required to bring 
the matter hack unto its former state, so that the plasm was in every way 
relaxahle, and weak and powerless, in order that it might not, in addition 
to its natural sagacity, he full of power as well, 

“I moulded it, and it was fair; and I rejoiced at seeing mine own work, and 
from below I called upon the Monarch to behold. And He did look on it, 
and was rejoiced, and ordered that the Souls should he enfleshed. 

‘Then were they first plunged in deep gloom, and, learning that they were 
condemned, began to wail, . . 33 ° I was myself amazed at the Souls’ 
utterances. ” 

19. Now give good heed, son Homs, for thou art being told the Mystic 
Spectacle which Kamephis, our forefather, was privileged to hear from 
Hermes, record-writer of all deeds, and I from Kamephis, most ancient of 
[us] all, ivhen he did honour me with the Black [Rite] that gives perfection; 
hear thou it now from met 

Fo r when, O wondrous son of mighty fame, if they were about to he shut in 
their prisons, some simply uttered wails and groans — in just the self-same 
way as beasts that once have been at liberty, when torn from their 
accustomed haunts they love so well, will be bad slaves, will fight and make 
revolt, and be in no agreement with their masters; nay more, if circumstance 
should serve, will even do to death those that oppress them. 331 


329 Sc. “signs of the zodiac,” so-called. 

330 There is a lacuna in the text, which I have thus conjecturally completed. 

331 The reading of this sentence has not yet been properly emended, so that its translation is somewhat conjectural. 


-61 - 



Others with louder outcry hissed like snakes; another one shrieked shrilly, 
and ere he spake shed many tears, and, turning up and down what things 
served him as eyes, he said: 

20. “O Heaven, thou source of our begetting, O /Ether, Air, O Hands 
and holy Breath of God our Monarch, O ye most brilliant Stars, eyes of 
the Gods, O tireless light of Sun and Moon, co-nurslings of our origin , — 
reft from [you] all we suffer piteously. 

“And this the more, in that from spacious realms of light, from out [thy] 
holy envelope and wealthy dome, and from the blessed government we shared 
with Gods, we shall be thus shut down into these honourless and lowly 
quarters. 

“What is the so unseemly thing we miserables have done ? What [crime] 
deserves these punishments ? How many sins await us wretched ones? How 
many are the things we have to do in this our hopeless plight, necessities to 
furnish for this watery frame that is so soon dissolved? 

21 . “For that no longer shall our eyes behold the souls of God; when 
through such watery spheres as these we see our own forefather Heaven 
grown small and tiny, we shall dissolve in sighs, — nay, there’ll be times we 
shall not see at all 332 , for sentence hath been passed on us poor things; the 
gift of real sight hath not been given to us, in that it hath not been 
permitted us to see without the light. Windows they are, not eyes! 333 

“How wretchedly shall we endure to hear our kindred breaths breathe in 
the air, when we no longer shall be breathing with them ! For home, instead 
of this great world high in the air, a heart’s small mass awaits us. Set 
Thou us free from bonds so base as these to which we have sunk down, and 
end our grief! 

“O Ford, and Father, and our Maker, if so it be Thou hast thus quickly 
grown indifferent unto the works of Thine own Hands, appoint for us some 
limits ! Still deem us worthy of some words, though they be few, while yet we 
can see through the whole world-order bright on every side!” 

22. Thus speaking, Horns, son, the Souls gained their request; for that the 
Monarch came, and sitting on the Throne of Truth made answer to their 
prayers. 


332 An Orphic verse has here crept into the text from the margin. It runs: “By light it is we see; by eyes we naught 
behold.” Fragm. Monad., x., p. 504, Herm. 

333 Cf. Plat., Men., 76; Seneca, Qucest. Nat, iv. 9. 


- 62 - 



“O Souls, Love and Necessity shall be jour lords 334 , thej who are lords 
and marshals after Me of all, 335 Know, all of you who are set under My 
unageing rule, that as long as ye keep you free of sin, ye shall dwell in the 
fields of Heaven; but if some cause of blame for aught attach itself to you, ye 
shall dwell in the place that Destiny allots, condemned to mortal wombs. 

“If, then, the things imputed to your charge be slight, leaving the bond of 
fleshly frames subject to death, ye shall again embrace your father] 
Heaven, and sigh no more; but if ye shall commit some greater sins, and 
with the end appointed of your frames be not advanced, no longer shall ye 
dwell in Heaven, nor even in the bodies of mankind, but shall continue 
after that to wander round in lives irrational, ” 336 

23. Thus speaking^ Homs mine, He gave to all the gift of breath 337 , and 
thus continued: 

“It is not without purpose or by chance I have laid down the law of your 
transforming^ '; but as [it will be] for the worse if ye do aught unseemly, so 
for the better, if ye shall will what’s worthy of your birth. 

“For I, and no one else, will be the Witness and the Watcher. Know, then, 
it is for what ye have done heretofore, ye do endure this being shut in bodies 
as a punishment. 

“The difference in your rebirths, accordingly, for you, shall be as I have 
said, a difference of bodies, and their final] dissolution [shall be] a benefit 
and a [ return to] the fair happiness of former days. 

“But if ye think to do aught else unworthy of Me, your mind shall lose its 
sight so as to think the contrary [of what is true], and take the punishment 
for benefit; the change to better things for infamous despite. 

“But the more righteous of you, who stand upon the threshold of the change 
to the diviner state, shall among men be righteous kings, and genuine 
philosophers, founders of states, and lawgivers, and real seers, and true 


334 Cf. Tim. 42 A: “When they should be implanted in bodies by necessity . . . they should have . . . sensation . . . and 
love.” 

335 Cf. Frag, xxiii. 

336 Cf. Tim., 42 B: “He who lived well during his appointed time was to return and dwell in his native star, and there 
he would have a blessed and congenial existence. But if he failed in attaining this, at the second birth, he would pass 
into a woman, and if, when in that state of being, he did not desist from evil, he would be continually changed into 
some brute who resembled him in the evil nature which he had acquired, and would not cease from his toils and 
transformations until he followed the revolution of the ‘same’ and the ‘like’ within him, and overcame by the help of 
reason the turbulent and irrational mob of later accretions, made up of fire and air and water and earth, and returned 
to the form of his first and better state.” Notice the omission of any reference to the inferior status of woman in the 
Egyptian tradition. 

337 Lit. “their spirits” — which apparently link the souls with their bodies. 

338 Reading fj.sxa(3oka?. 


- 63 - 



herb-knowers ', and prophets of the Gods most excellent ) skilful musicians, 
skilled astronomers, and augurs wise, consummate sacrificers, — as many of 
you as are worthy of things fair and good. 

24. “Among winged tribes [they shall be] eagles, for these will neither scare 
away their kind nor feed on them ; nay more, when they are by, no other 
weaker beast will be allowed by them to suffer wrong for what will be the 
eagles’ nature is too just [to suffer it]. 

“Among four-footed things [they will be] lions, — a life of strength and of a 
kind which in a measure needs no sleep, in mortal body practising the 
exercises of immortal life — for they nor weary grow nor sleep. 339 

“And among creeping things [they will be] dragons, in that this animal 
will have great strength and live for long will do no harm, and in a way be 
friends with man, and let itself be tamed; it will possess no poison and will 
cast its skin, 340 as is the nature of the Gods. 

“Among the things that swim [they will be] dolphins; for dolphins will 
take pity upon those who fall into the sea, and if they are still breathing 
bear them to the land, while if they’re dead they will not ever even touch 
them, though they will be the most voracious tribe that in the water dwells. ” 

25. Thus speaking God became imperishable Mind. 341 Thereon, son 
Horns, from the Earth uprose a very Mighty Spirit which no mass of body 
could contain, whose strength consisted in his intellect. And though he knew 
full well the things on which he questioned — the body with which man was 
clothed according to his type, a body fair and dignified, yet savage overmuch 
and full of fear — immediately he saw the souls were entering the plasms, he 
cried out: 

“What are these called, O Hermes, Writer of the Records of the Gods?” 

And when he answered “Men!” — ‘Hermes,” he said, “it is a daring 
work, this making man, with eyes inquisitive, and talkative of tongue, with 
power henceforth to hear things even which are no concern of his, dainty of 
smell, who will use to its full his power of touch on every thing. 


339 Cf. Manetho, cited in the Orthography of Chceroboscus (Cramer, Anecd. Ox., ii. 235, 32; TElian, H. A., v. 39, who 
follows Apion; R. 145, n. 3). But indeed this queer belief is a commonplace of the Mediaeval Bestiaries, which all go 
back to their second century Alexandrian prototype, the famous Phjsiologus, which was doubtless in part based on 
Aristotle’s Histor y of Animals and Pliny’s Natural Histoy. 

34(1 Eaasi 8 e xai ytlgaaav. The reading is corrupt. But if we read yfjQa? for ytiganav, we have in the writer’s ornate and 
somewhat strained style £&v yfiga? for the usual yflpa? ExSuveiv found in Aristotle (H. V., 5. 7. 10; 8. 17. 11) for the 
changing of a serpent’s skin. The phrase “as is the nature of the Gods” may then be explained as referring to the 
parallel between the anciently supposed rejuvenescence of the serpent and the perpetual growing young of the Gods. 
341 Cf. C. H., i. 27: “This when he’d said, the Shepherd mingled with the powers.” Cf. Tim., 42 E: “When the Creator 
had made all these ordinances He remained in His own accustomed nature.” 


- 64 - 



“ Hast thou, his generator ; judged it good to leave him free from care ; ivho 
in the future daringly mil gasp upon the fairest mysteries which Nature 
hath ? Wouldst thou leave him without a grief who in the days to come will 
make his thoughts reach unto mysteries beyond the Earth ? 

26. “Men will dig up the roots of plants, and will find out their juices’ 
qualities. Men will observe the nature of the stones. Men will dissect not 
only animals irrational, but they’ll dissect themselves, desiring to find out 
how they were made. They will stretch out their daring hands e’en to the 
sea, and cutting self grown forests down will ferry one another o ’er to lands 
beyond. [Men] will seek out as well the inner nature of the holy spaces 
which no foot may tread, and will chase after them into the height, desiring 
to observe the nature of the motion of the Heaven. 

‘These are yet moderate things [which they will do]. For nothing more 
remains than Earth ’s remotest realms; nay, in their daring they will track 
out Night, the farthest Night of all. 

27. ‘Naught have they, then, to stop them from receiving their initiation in 
the good of freedom from all pain, and, unconstrained by terror’s grievous 
goads, from living softly out a life free from all care. 

‘Then will they not gird on the armour of an over-busy daring up to 
Heaven ? Will they not, then, reach out their souls freed from all care unto 
the [primal] elements themselves ? 

‘Teach them henceforth to long to plan out something, where they have as 
well to fear the danger of its ill-success, in order that they may be tamed by 
the sharp tooth of pain in failure of their hopes. 

“Let the too busy nature of their souls be balanced by desires, and fears, 
and griefs, and empty hopes. 

“Let loves in quick succession sway their souls, hopes, manifold desires, 
sometimes fulfilled, and sometimes unfulfilled, that the sweet bait of their 
success may draw them into struggle amid direr ills. 

“Eet fever lay its heavy hand on them, that losing heart they may submit 
desire to discipline. ” 

28. Thou grievest, dost thou, Horns, son, to hear thy mother put these 
things in words ? Art thou not struck with wonder, art thou not terror- 
struck at how poor man was grievously oppressed ? Hear what is sadder 
still! 


- 65 - 



When Momos said these things Hermes was pleased \ for ivhat he said was 
said out of affection for him; and so he did all that he recommended \ 
speaking thus: 

“Momos, the Nature of the breath Divine which doth surround [all 
things] shall not become inert. The Master of the universe appointed me as 
steward and as ?nanager. 

“Wherefore the overseer of His co?mnand will be the keen-eyed Goddess of 
the all, Adrasteia 342 ; and I will skilfully devise an instrument, mysterious, 
possessed of power of sight that cannot err, and cannot be escaped, whereto 
all things on earth shall of necessity be subject, from birth to final 
dissolution, — an instrument which binds together all that’s done. This 
instrument shall rule all other things on Earth as well [as man]. ” 

29. These words, said Hermes, did I speak to Momos, and forthwith the 
instrument ivas set a-going. 

When this was done, and when the souls had entered in the bodies, and 
[Hermes] had himself been praised for what was done, again the Monarch 
did convoke the Gods in session. The Gods assembled, and once more did 
He make proclamation, saying: 

‘Ye Gods, all ye who have been made of chief est Nature, free from all 
decay, who have received as your appointed lot for ever more to order out the 
mighty TEon, through whom all universal things will never weary grow 
surrendering themselves in turn the one to other, — how long shall we be 
rulers of this sovereignty that none can ever know ? How long these things, 
shall they transcend the power of sight of Sun and Moon ? 

“Tet each of us bring forth according to his power. Het us by our oivn 
energy wipe out this inert state of things; let chaos seem to be a ?nyth 
incredible to future days. Set hand to mighty work; and I myself will first 
begin. ” 

30. He spake; straightway in cosmic order there began the differentiation of 
the up-to-then black unity [of things]. And Heaven shone forth above 
tricked out with all his mysteries; Earth, still a -tremble, as the Sun shone 
forth grew harder, and appeared with all the fair adornments that bedeck 
her round on every side. Tor beautiful to God are even things which men 
think ?nean, in that in truth they have been made to serve the laivs of God. 


342 Nemesis, the karmic deity, “she from whom none can escape, according to the generally accepted derivation of 
the name. 


- 66 - 



And God rejoiced ivhen now He saw His works a-moving and ' filling full 
His Hands, which held as much as all surrounding space, with all that 
Nature had produced, and squeezing tight the handfuls mightily, He said: 

“Take [these], O holy Earth, take those, all-honoured one, who art to be 
the mother of all things, and henceforth lack thou naught!” 

31. God spake, and opening His Hands, such Hands as God should 
have, He poured them all into the composition of the world. And they in 
the beginnings were unknown in every way; for that the Souls as newly shut 
in prison, not enduring their disgrace, began to strive in emulation with the 
Gods in Heaven, in full command of their high birth, and when held back, 
in that they had the same Creator ; made revolt, and using weaker men as 
instruments, began to make them set upon each other, and range themselves 
in conflict, and make war among themselves. 

Thus strength did mightily prevail o’er weakness, so that the strong did 
burn and massacre the weak, and from the holy places down they cast the 
living and the dead down from the holy shrines, until the Elements in their 
distress resolved to go to God their Monarch [to complain] about the savage 
state in which men lived. 

The evil now being very great, the Elements approached the God who made 
them, and formulated their complaint in some such words as these: 

32. It was moreover Fire who first received authority to speak. He said: 

“O Ford, Artificer of this new World, thou Name mysterious among the 
Gods, and up to now revered by all mankind, how long hast Thou, O 
Daimon, judged it right to leave the life of mortals without God? 

“Show now Thyself unto Thy World consulting] 43 Thee; initiate the 
savagery of life with peace; give laws to life; to right give oracles; fill with 
fair hopes all things; and let men fear the vengeance of the Gods, and none 
will sin. 

“Should they receive due retribution for their sins, they will refrain 
henceforth from doing wrong ; they will respect their oaths, and no one any 
more will ponder sacrilege. 

‘Eet them be taught to render thanks for benefits received, that I, the Fire, 
may joyfully do sendee in the sacrificial rites, that they may from the altar 
send sweet-smelling vapours forth. 


343 Sc. as supplicants consulting an oracle. 


- 67 - 



“For up to now I am polluted, Ford; and by the godless daring of these 
men I am compelled to burn up flesh. They will not let me be for what I 
was brought forth; but they adulterate with all indecency my undecaying 
state. ” 

33. And Air too said: 

“I also, Master, am made turbid by the vapours which the bodies of the 
dead exhale, and I am pestilential, and, no longer filled with health, I gaye 
down from above on things I ought not to behold. ” 

Next Water, O my son of mighty soul, received authority to speak, and 
spake and said: 

“O Father, O wonderful Creator of all things, Daimon self born, and 
Nature ’s Maker, who through Thee doth conceive all things, now at this 
last, command the rivers’ streams for ever to be pure, for that the rivers and 
the seas or wash the murderers’ hands or else receive the murdered. ” 

34. After came Earth in bitter grief, and taking up the tale, O son of high 
renown, thus she began to speak: 

“O sovereign Ford, Chief of the Heavenly Ones, and Master of the 
Wheels 344 , Thou Ruler of us Elements, O Sire of them who stand beside 
Thee, from whom all things have the beginning of their increase and of their 
decrease, and into whom they cease again and have the end that is their due 
according to Necessity ’s decree, O greatly honoured One, the godless rout of 
men doth dance upon my bosom. 

“I hold in my embrace as well the nature of all things; for I, as Thou didst 
give command, not only bear them all, but I receive them also when they ’re 
killed. Rut now am I dishonoured. The world upon the Earth though filled 
with all things [else] hath not a God. 

‘ For having naught to fear they sin in everything, and from my heights, O 
Ford, down [dead] they fall by every evil art. And soaking with the juices 
of their carcases I’m all corrupt. Hence am I, Ford, compelled to hold in 
me those of no worth. With all I bear I would hold God as well. 

“Bestow on Earth, if not Thyself, for I could not contain Thee, yet some 
holy Emanation 345 of Thyself. Make Thou the Earth more honoured than 
the rest of Elements; for it is right that she should boast of gifts from Thee, 
in that she giveth all. ” 


344 Or disks, presumably the world-wheels. 

345 nva isgav atioggoiav. 


- 68 - 



35. Thus spake the Elements; and God, fulfilling all things with the 
sound of This [most] holy 1 Voice, spake thus: 

“Depart, ye Holy Ones, ye Children worthy of a mighty Sire, nor yet in 
any way attempt to innovate, nor leave the whole of [this] My World 
without your active service. 

‘Tor now another Efflux of My Nature is amongyou, and he shall be a 
pious supervisor of all deeds — -judge incorruptible of living men and 
monarch absolute of those beneath the earth, not only striking terror [into 
them] but taking vengeance on them. And by his class of birth the fate he 
hath deserved shall follow every man. ” 

A nd so the Elements did cease from their complaint, upon the Master’s 

0 rder ; and they held their peace; and each of them continued in the exercise 
of his autho rity and in his rule. 

36. And Horus thereon said: 

How was it, mother, then, that Earth received God’s Efflux ? 

And Isis said: 

1 may not tell the story of [this] birth 346 ; for it is not permitted to describe 
the origin of thy descent, O Horus, [son] of mighty power, lest afterwards 
the way -of birth of the immortal Gods should be known unto men , — 
except so far that God the Monarch, the universal Orderer and Architect, 
sent for a little while thy mighty sire Osiris, and the mightiest Goddess Isis, 
that they might help the world, for all things needed them. 

Tis they who filled life full of life. Tis they who caused the savagery of 
mutual slaughtering of men to cease. Tis they who hallowed precincts to the 
Gods their ancestors and spots for holy rites. Tis they who gave to men 
laws, food, and shelter. 

Tis they who will, says Hermes, learn to know the secrets of my records all, 
and will make separation of them; and some they will keep for themselves, 
while those that are best suited for the benefit of mortal men, they will 
engrave on tablet and on obelisk. 

Tis they who were the first to set up courts of law; and filled the world with 
justice and fair rule. Tis they who were the authors of good pledges and of 
faith, and brought the mighty witness of an oath into men ’s lives. 


346 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 3 (Com.). 


- 69 - 



His they ivho taught men how to wrap up those who ceased to live >, as they 
should be. 347 

His they who searched into the cruelly of death, and learned that though the 
spirit which goes out longs to return into men ’s bodies, yet if it ever fail to 
have the power of getting back again, then loss of life results. 

His they who learned from Hermes that surrounding space was filled with 
daimons, and graved on hidden ston es [the hidden teaching]. 

His they alone who, taught by Hermes in God’s hidden codes, became the 
authors of the arts, and sciences, and all pursuits which men do practise, 
and givers of their laws. 

His they who, taught by Hermes that the things below have been disposed 
by God to be in sympathy with things above, established on the earth the 
sacred rites o ’er which the mysteries in Heaven preside. 

His they who, knowing the destructibility of [mortal] frames, devised the 
grade of p rophets, in all things perfected, in order that no p rophet who 
stretched forth his hands unto the Gods, should be in ignorance of anything 
that magic and philosophy should feed the soul, and medicine preserve the 
body when it suffered pain. 

38. And having done all this, my son, Osiris and myself perceiving that the 
world was [now] quite full, were thereupon demanded back by those who 
dwell in Heaven, but could not go above till we had ?nade appeal unto the 
Monarch, that surrounding space might with this knoivledge of the soul 1348 
be filled as well, and we ourselves succeed in making our ascent acceptable 
[to Him]. . . . For that God doth in hymns rejoice. 

Ay, mother, Horns said. On me as well bestow the knowledge of this 
hymn, that I ?nay not remain in ignorance. 

And Isis said: Give ear, O son! 349 


347 Sc. mummification. 

348 fiecogla, contemplative science, face to face knowledge. 

349 The Commentary begins at the end of the following excerpt. 


- 70 - 



EXCERPT XXVI. 

THE VIRGIN OF THE WORLD [II.] 


(Patrizzi (p. 32b) runs this on to the last without a break. 

Text: Stob., Phys., ili. 45, under heading: “In the Same”; G. pp. 420-427; M. i. 299- 
304; W.i. 407-414. 

Menard; Livre III., No. ii. of “Fragment,” etc., as above, pp. 201-208.) 


39. NOW if thou wouldst , O son of mighty soul, know aught beside, ask 
on! 

And Horns said: O mother of great honour, I mu Id know how royal souls 
are born ? 

And Isis said: Son Horns, the distinction which marks out the royal souls 
is somewhat of this kind. 

Four regions are there in the universe which fall beneath a law and 
leadership which cannot be transgressed — Heaven, and the Hither, and the 
Air, and the most holy Earth. 

Above in Heaven, son, the Gods do dwell, o’er whom with all the rest doth 
rule the Architect of all; and in the Hither [dwell] the Stars, o’er whom the 
mighty Eight-giver the Sun holds sway; but in the Air [live] only souls 350 , 
o’er whom doth rule the Moon ; and on the Earth [do dwell] men and the 
rest of living things, o ’er whom he who doth happen to be king holds sway. 

40. The Gods engender, son, the kings it has desen’ed, to rule [the race] 
that lives on Earth. The rulers are the emanations of the king, of whom the 
nearer to him is more royal than the rest; for that the Sun, in that ’tis 
nearer than the Moon to God, is far more vast and potent, to whom the 
Moon comes second both in rank and power. 

The king, then, is the last of all the other Gods, but first of men; and so 
long as he is upon the Earth, he is divorced from his true godship, but hath 
something that doth distinguish him from men and which is like to God. 

The soul which is sent down to dwell in him, is from that space which is 
above those regions whence [the souls] descend to other men. Down from 
that space the souls are sent to rule for those two reasons, son. 


35,1 MS. A adds “of daimones.” 


-71 - 



41 . They who have run a noble, blameless race throughout the cycle of their 
lives, and are about to be changed into Gods, [are born as kings,] in order 
that by exercise of kingship they ?nay train themselves to use the power the 
Gods enjoy ; while certain souls who are already Gods, but have in some 
slight way infringed the rule of life which God inspired, are born as kings, 
in order that they may not, in being clothed in bodies, undergo the 
punishment of loss of dignity as well as nature, and that they may not, 
when they are enfleshed, have the same lot as other men, but have when 
bound what they enjoyed when free. 

42. The differences which are, however, in the dispositions shown by those 
who play the part of kings, are not determined by distinguishing their souls, 
for these are all divine, but by the constitution of the angels and the 
daimons who attend on them. For that such souls as these descending for 
such purposes do not come down without a guard and escort; for Justice up 
above knows how to give to each what is its due estate e ’en though they be 
made exiles from their county ever fair. 

When, then, my son, the angels and the daimons who bring down the soul 
are of a warlike kind, it has to keep firm hold of their proclivities, 
forgetting its own proper deeds, but all the more remembering the doings of 
the other host attached to it. 

When they are peaceful, then the soul as well doth order its own course in 
peace. 

When they love justice, then it too defends the right. 

When they are music-lovers, then it also sings. 

And when they are truth-lovers, then it also doth philosophise. 

For as it were out of necessity these souls keep a firm hold of the proclivities 
of those that bring them here; for they are falling down to man’s estate, 
forgetting their own nature, and the farther they depart from it, the more 
they have in memoy the disposition of those [powers] which shut them [into 
bodies]. 

43. Well hast thou, mother, all explained, said Horus. But noble souls , — 
how they are born, thou hast not told me yet. 

As on the Earth, son Horus, there are states which differ one from other, 
so also is it in the case of souls. For they have regions whence they start; 
and that which starts from a more glorious place, hath nobler birth than 
one which doth not so. For just as among men the free is thought more 


- 72 - 



noble than the slave — (for that which is superior in souls and of a ruling 
nature of necessity subjects what is inferior) — so also, son, . ... 351 


44. And how are male and female souls produced ? 

Souls, Homs, son, are of the selfsame nature in themselves, in that they 
are from one and the same place where the Creator modelled them; nor male 
nor female are they. Sex is a thing of bodies, not of souls. 

That which brings it about that some of them are stouter ; some more 
delicate, is, son, that [cosmic] “air” in which all things are made. “Air” 
for the soul is nothing but the body which envelopes it, an element which is 
composed of earth and ivater, air and fire. 352 

As, then, the composition of the female ones has more of wet and cold, but 
less of dry and warm, accordingly the soul which is shut in a plasm of this 
kind, becomes relaxed and delicate, just as the contrary is found to be in 
case of males. 

For in their case there’s more of dry and warm, and less of cold and wet; 
wherefore the souls in bodies such as these are sturdy and more active. 

45. And how do souls become intelligent, O mother mine ? 

And Isis answered: 

The organ of the sight, my son, is swathed in wrappings. When these are 
dense and thick, the eye is dim; but when they ’re thin and light, then is the 
sight most keen. So is it also for the soul. For it as well has envelopes 
incorporal appropriate to it, just as it is itself incorporal. These envelopes 
are “airs” which are in us. When these are light and thin and clear, then is 
the soul intelligent; but, on the contrary, when they are dense and thick and 
turbid, then [the soul], as in bad weather, sees not at distance but only 
things which lie about its feet. 

46. And Homs said: 

What is the reason, mother, that the men outside our holiest land are not 
so wise of mind as our compatriots ? 

And Isis said: 


351 A lacuna, unfortunately, here occurs in the text, and must be of some extent, for the way of both of these souls is 
not given. 

352 Cf. 45 below. 


- 73 - 



The Earth lies in the middle of the universe upon her hack , like to a 
human being, with eyes turned up to heaven, and portioned out into as 
many regions as there are limbs in man. 

She turns her eyes to Heaven as though to her own Sire 353 , that with his 
changes she may also bring about her own. 

She hath her head set to the south of all, right shoulder to south-east, left 
shoulder to south-west; her feet below the Tear, right foot beneath its tail, 
left under its head; her thighs beneath those that succeed the Tear; her waist 
beneath the middle [Stars]. 

47. A sign of this is that men in the south, who dwell upon her head, are 
fine about the head and have good hair. 

Those in the east are ready for a fight and archer folk — -for this pertains to 
the right hand. 

Those in the west are steadier and for the most part fight with the left hand, 
and what is done by others with the right, they for their part attribute to the 
left. 

Those underneath the Tear excel in feet and have especially good legs. 

Those who come after them a little way, about the yme which is our present 
Italy and Greece, they all have well-made thighs and backs. . . . 

Moreover, all these [northern] parts being whiter than the rest bear whiter 
men upon them. 

Tut since the holiest land of our forebears lies in the midst of Earth, and 
that the midst of a man ’s body serves as the precinct of the heart alone, and 
heart's the spot from which the soul doth start, the men of it not only have 
no less the other things which all the rest possess, but as a special thing are 
gifted with intelligence beyond all men and filled with wisdom, in that they 
are begotten and brought up above her heart. 

48. Further, my son, the south being the receiver of the clouds which mass 
themselves together from the atmosphere ... 3)4 

For instance, it is just because there is this concentration of them in the 
south, that it is said our river doth flow thence, upon the breaking up of the 
frost there. 


353 Cf. P. S. A., xxiv. 1. 

354 Something has evidently fallen out here, as the sentence is nowhere completed. 


- 74 - 



For ivhensoe ’er a cloud 355 descends, it turns the air about it into mist, and 
sends it downward in a kind of fog; and fog or mist is an impediment not 
only to the eyes, but also to the mind. 

Whereas the east, O Homs, great in glory, in that ’tis thrown into 
confusion and made overhot by the continual risings of the sun, and in like 
fashion too, the west, its opposite, in that it suffers the same things through 
its descents, 356 afford the men born in them no conditions for clear 
observation. And Boreas with his concordant cold, together with their 
bodies doth congeal the minds of men as well. 

Whereas the centre of all these being pure and undisturbed, foreknows both 
for itself and all that are in it. For, free from trouble, ever it brings forth, 
adorns and educates, and only with such weapons wars [on men], and wins 
the victory, and with consummate skill, like a good satrap, 357 bestows the 
fruit of its own victory upon the vanquished. 

49. This too expound, O lady, mother mine ! For what cause is it that 
when men still keep alive in long disease, their rational part — their very 
reason and their very soul — at times becomes disabled? 

And Isis answer made: 

Of living things, my son, some are made friends with fire, and some with 
water, some with air ; and some with earth, and some with two or three of 
these, and some with all. 

And, on the contrary, again some are made enemies of fire, and some of 
water, some of earth, arid some of air, and some of two of them, and some 
of three, and some of all. 

For instance, son, the locust arid all flies flee fire ; the eagle and the hawk 
and all highflying birds flee water; fish, air and earth; the snake avoids the 
open air. Whereas snakes and all creeping things love earth; all swimming 
things [love] water; winged things, air, of which they are the citizens; while 
those that fly still higher [love] the fire and have their habitat near it. Not 
that some of the animals as well do not love fire; for instance salamanders, 
for they even have their homes in it. It is because one or another of the 
elements doth form their bodies outer envelope. 


353 Reading vecpeXt] for vecpeXr]. The text is very faulty. 

356 These ideas of course spring from the conception of a flat earth and moving sun. The sun was thus thought to be 
nearer the earth at its rising and setting, and consequently those at the extremes of east and west were thought to be 
in danger of being burnt up by its heat. 

357 Some historical allusion may perhaps be suspected in this term; but I can find nothing appropriate to suggest. 


-75 - 



50. Each soul, accordingly, while it is in its body is weighted and 
constricted by these four. Moreover it is natural it also should be pleased 
with some of them and pained with others. 

For this cause, then, it doth not reach the height of its prosperity; still, as it 
is divine by nature, e’en while [wrapped up] in them, it struggles and it 
thinks, though not such thoughts as it would think were it set free from 
being bound in bodies. 

Moreover if these frames] are swept with storm and stress, or of disease or 
fear, then is the soul itself tossed on the waves, as man 358 upon the deep 
with nothing steady under him. 

COMMENTARY 

ARGUMENT 

1 . The “Virgin of the World” is a sacred sermon of initiation into the Hermes-lore, 
the first initiation, in which the tradition of the wisdom is handed on by the 
hierophant to the neophyte, by word of mouth. The instructor, or revealer, is the 
representative of Isis-Sophia, and speaks in her name, pouring forth for her 
beloved son, the new-born Horns, the first draught of immortality, which is to 
purge away the poison of the mortal cup of forgetfulness and ignorance, and so 
raise him from the “dead.” 

This pouring-forth explains that the divine economy is perfect order, mystery 
transcending mystery, — each state of being, and each being, a mystery to those 
below that state. 

This order no mortal intellect can ever grasp; nay, in the far-off ages, when as yet 
there were no men, but only Gods, those essences that know no death, the first 
creation of the World-creator, — even these Gods, these mysteries to us, were in 
amazement at the glories of the greater mysteries which decked the Heaven with 
their unveiled transcendent beauty. Even these Gods did not know God as yet. 

2. The Gods were immortal, but unknowing; they were intoxicated with Heaven’s 
beauty, amazed, nay awestruck, at the splendour of the mysteries of Heaven. Then 
came there forth another outpouring of the Father over all; He poured the 
Splendour of His Mind into their hearts and they began to know. 359 

With this representation is blended a mythical historical tradition which suggests 
that all this was brought about for an “earth” on which our humanity had not as yet 
appeared, in far-off distant days when apparently our earth was not as now, ages 
ago, the purest Golden Age when there were Gods, not men. In that race of Gods, 


358 For av0gw7io? Meineke reads av0sgixo? (“asphodel”), and compares Callimachus, H. in Del., 193: TtaXipgoifl 
gravy/stai av0sgixo? at?. But I see no necessity for this strained “emendation.” 

359 The arising of the knowledge of God among the Gods, and the gradual descent of this knowledge down to man, 
reminds us somewhat of the method of the descent of the “Gospel” in the system of Basilides. 


- 76 - 



those of them in whom the ray was no low-burning spark, but a divine flame, were 
the instructors in the heavenly wisdom. 

3. Of these was Hermes, a race or “being” rather than an individual; these “Sons of 
Fire” left the record of their wisdom engraved on “stone” in symbol, in charge of 
others of the same race but less knowing than themselves; and so they ascended to 
Heaven. 

4. Those that succeeded them had not the flame so bright within their hearts; they 
were of the same race, but younger souls — the Tat-race. Hermes could not hand on 
the direct knowledge to them, the “perfect sight” (Gsoopioc), and so recorded the 
wisdom in symbol and myth. Still later the Asclepius-race joined themselves to the 
Tat-souls. 

All this, however, took place many many ages ago, long even before the days of the 
men-gods Osiris and Isis; for the real wisdom of Hermes was so ancient that even 
Isis herself had had to search out the hidden records, and that too by means of the 
inner sight, when she herself had won the power to see, and the True Sun had risen 
for her mind. 

5. But the strain of reconstructing the history of this far-distant past, as he 
conceived it to have been, is too much for the writer. He knows he is dealing with 
“myths,” with what Plutarch would have called the “doings of the daimones;” he 
knows that in reality these primaeval “Books” of Hermes have no longer any 
physical existence, if indeed they ever had any; he knows that no matter what 
legends are told, or whatever the general priesthood may believe about ancient 
physical inscriptions of the primaeval Hermes, — all this has passed away, and that 
the real wisdom of Hermes is engraved on the tablets of the asther, and not hidden 
in the shrines of earth. 

The “Books” are engraved in the “sacred symbols of the cosmic elements,” and 
hidden away hard by the “secrets of Osiris” — the mysteries of creative fire, the 
light that speaks in the heart. The true Books of Hermes are hidden away in their 
own zones, the pure elements of the unseen world — the celestial Egypt. 

6. This wisdom was held in safe keeping for the “souls” of men; it was a soul- 
gnosis, not a physical knowledge. Hereupon the writer begins the recital of his 
tradition 360 of the creation of the “souls” of men in their unfallen state, all of which 
is derived from the “Books of Hermes.” The soul-creation runs as follows: 

The Watchers 361 approach the Creator. The hour has struck for a new Cosmic 
Dawn, for a new Day. The time has come for Cosmos to awake after the Night. 362 
The Creative Mind of the universe turns His attention, His thought, to a new phase 
of tilings, a new world-period. 


36 ° Q r j-ather apocalypse; see § 15: “As Hermes says when he speaks unto me.” 

361 Cf. the Egregores of The Book of Enoch-, see Charles’ Translation (Oxford; 1893), Index, under “Watchers.” 

362 The new Manvantara following a periodical Pralaya, to use the terms of Indo-Aryan tradition. 


- 77 - 



7. God smiled, and His laughter thrilled through space, 363 and with His Word, 
called forth into the light the new dawn from out the primaeval darkness of the new 
world-space. His first creation, transcendental or intelligible Nature, stood before 
Him, in all the marvel of her new beauty, the primal pleroma, or potential fullness, 
of the new universe or system, the ideal cosmos of our world, for there were many 
others, — the Gods who marvelled at the mystery. 

Straightway this Nature fell from one into three, herself and Toil and their fairest 
child Invention, to whom God gave the gift of being, themselves producing ideal 
form alone. 

The first creation, then, was the bringing forth of potencies and types and ideas, to 
whom God gave the gift of being; it was as yet the world “above,” the primaeval 
Heaven, in ultimate perfection, thus constituting the unchanging boundaries of the 
new universe that was to be. These things-that-are were filled with “mysteries,” not 
“breaths” or “lives,” for these were not as yet. 

8. The next stage is the breathing of the spiritual (not the physical) breath of lives 
into the fairest blend of the primal elements that condition the world-area. This 
blend or soul- sub stance is called psychosis. The primal elements were not our mixed 
earth, water, fire, and air, but “knowing fire” (perhaps “fire in itself,” as Hermes 
elsewhere calls it, or intelligible fire, perchance the “flower of fire” of the so-called 
“Chaldasan Oracles” 364 ) and unknowing air, if we may judge from the phrase (7): 
“Let heaven be filled with all tilings full, and air and aether [? = fire] too!” It is 
Heaven or the ideal world that is so filled; even earth-water was not yet manifested, 
much less earth and water. 

It seems, then, that these souls (souls corresponding above with the subsequent 
man-stage below) were a blend of the three: spirit, knowing fire, and unknowing 
air, — triads, yet a unity called psychosis. 

9. They were moreover all essentially equal, but differed according to some fixed 
law of numbering; they were also apparently definite in number, one soul 
perchance for every star, as with Plato, according to the law of similarity of less and 
greater, of within and without. 

10. These souls, then, were “sacred (or typical) men,” a creation prior to that of the 
“sacred animals”; their habitat was in Upper Nature, the “all-fairest station of the 
:et her” — the celestial cosmos. 

1 1 . They were appointed to certain stations and to the task of keeping the “wheel 
revolving,” — that is, as we shall see, they were to fashion forms for birth and death, 
and so provide means of transmission for the life-currents ever circulating in the 
great sphere. This was their appointed task, the law imposed on them, as obedient 
children of the Great King, their sire. So long as they kept their appointed stations 
they were to live for ever in surroundings of bliss and beauty, in full contemplation 


363 The creation is figured in one Egyptian tradition as the bursting forth of the Creator into seven peals of 
laughter, — a sevenfold “Ha!” 

364 Cf. the “florescence” of § 10. 


- 78 - 



of the glories of the greater universe, throned amid the stars. But if they disobeyed 
the law, bonds and punishment await them. 

12. We next come to a further creation of souls — a subject somewhat difficult to 
follow. These souls are of an inferior grade to the preceding, for they are composed 
of the primal water and earth, of “water in itself’ and “earth in itself’ we must 
suppose, and not of the compound elements we now call by these names. These 
are the souls of certain “sacred animals” or lives, which bear the same relationship 
to the souls which “keep the wheel revolving” as animals do to man on eardi. They 
are, however, not shaped like the animals on earth, nor possess even typical animal 
forms, but bear the forms of men, though they are not men. 

13. Still was the divine “water-earth” substance unexhausted, and so the residue 
was handed over to “those souls that had gone in advance and had been 
summoned to the land of Gods,” — that is to say, those stations near the Gods, in 
highest tether, of which mention has just been made. These souls are, of course, the 
man-souls proper. 

Out of this residue these Builders were to fashion animals, after the models the 
Creator gave them, — certain types of life, below the “man” type proper, ranged in 
due order corresponding to the “motions of the souls.” That is to say, there were 
various classes of Builders according to the types of animals which were to be 
copied. The Builders were to fashion the forms, the Creator was to breathe into 
them the life. 

14. Thus these Builders fashioned the etheric doubles of birds, quadrupeds, fish 
and reptiles, and not their physical bodies, for as yet the earth was not solid. 

15. And so the Builder-souls accomplished their task, and fashioned the primaeval 
copies of the celestial types of animals. Proud of their work, they grew restive at the 
restraints placed upon them by the law of their stations, and overstepped the limits 
decreed by the Creator. 161 

Whereupon the punishment is pronounced, and the Creator resolves to make the 
human frame, therein to imprison the disobedient souls. 

And here we learn incidentally that all of this psychogenesis which has gone before 
was the direct teaching of Hermes to the writer; of no physical Hermes, however, 
but of that Hermes whose “Books” are hidden in the zones (5), of the Hermes 
whom the writer, as he would have us believe, came to know face to face only after 


365 Cf. the same idea as expressed by Basilides (ap. Hipp., Philos., vii. 27), but in reversed order, when, speaking of 
the consummation of the world-process, and the final ascension of the “Sonship” with all its experience gained from 
union with matter, he says of the remaining souls, which have not reached the dignity of the Sonship, that the Great 
Ignorance shall come upon them for a space. 

“Thus all the souls of this state of existence, whose nature is to remain immortal in this state of existence alone, 
remain without knowledge of anything different from or better than this state; nor shall there be any rumour or 
knowledge of things superior in higher states, in order that the lower souls may not suffer pain by striving after 
impossible objects, just as though it were fish longing to feed on the mountains with sheep, for such a desire would 
end in their destruction. All things are indestructible if they remain in their proper condition, but subject to 
destmction if they desire to overleap and transgress their natural limits” (F. F. F, p. 270). 


- 79 - 



his inner vision was opened, and he had gazed with all-seeing eyes “upon the 
mysteries of that new dawn” (4). 

16. For the new and mysterious fabrication of the man- form, all the seven obedient 
Gods, to whom the man-souls are kin (17), are summoned by the chief of them, 
Hermes himself, the beloved son and messenger of the Supreme, “soul of My Soul, 
and holy mind of My own Mind.” 366 

17. All of the seven promise to bestow the best they have on man. 

18. The plasm out of which the man-form is to be modelled is the residue of the 
mixture out of which the Builders had already made the animal doubles. But the 
Builder of the man-frames was Hermes himself, who mixed the plasm with still 
more water. 

1 9. Here the writer inserts a further piece of information concerning the source of 
his tradition. It is no longer as before what Hermes himself reveals to him in vision, 
but what the writer was told at a certain initiation called the “Black Rite.” This rite 
was presided over by Kamephis, who is called the “earliest of all,” or perhaps more 
correcdy the “most primaeval of [us] all.” Kamephis is thus conceived as the 
representative of a more ancient wisdom than that of Isis, and yet even he but 
hands on the tradition of Hermes. 367 

20. The souls are “enfleshed,” and utter loud complaints. Apparently not all at first 
can speak articulately; most of them can only groan, or scream, or hiss. The leading 
class of souls can, however, so far dominate the plasm as to speak articulately, and 
so one of their number utters a desperate appeal to Heaven. 

21. They have now lost their celestial state, and Heaven is shut away from them; no 
longer can they see “without the light.” They are shut down into a “heart’s small 
compass”; the Sun of their being has become a light-spark only, hidden in the 
heart. This is, of course, the logos, the inmost reality in man. 

22. The souls pray for some amelioration of their unhappy lot, and the conditions 
of the moral law are expounded to them. They who do rightly shall, on their body’s 
dissolution, reascend to Heaven and be at rest; they who do ill, shall work out their 
redemption under the law of metempsychosis, or change from body to body, from 
prison to prison. 

23. Details of this metempsychosis are then given with special reference to the 
incarnations of the “more righteous,” who shall be kings, philosophers and 
prophets. Such souls apparently, for it is not expressly so stated, shall, in passing 
round the wheel of rebirth, when out of incarnation in a human body, have some 
sort of life with the souls of the leading types of animals, which are given as eagles, 
lions, dragons, and dolphins. Or, if we are unjustified in this speculation, such souls 
shall in their animal parts have intimate relation with the noblest types of animal 
essence (24). 


366 Cf. Cyril, C.Jul., i. 35; Frag. xvi. 

367 Cf. §§ 29 and 37. 


- 80 - 



25. There now comes upon die scene die mighty Intellect of the Earth, a veritable 
Erdgeist, in the form of Momus, who speaking out of affection for him (28), urges 
Hermes to increase ills and trials upon the souls of men, so that they shall not dare 
too much (25-27). And thereon Hermes sets in motion the instrument or engine of 
unerring fate and mechanical retribution (28, 29). 

29. Now all these things took place at the dawn of earth-life, when all as yet was 
inert, as far as our now solid earth is concerned. We must then suppose that as yet 
our present phase of existence on earth had not yet been manifested; that all was as 
yet in a far subtler or more primitive state of existence, when earth was still all “a- 
tremble,” and had not yet hardened to its present state of solidity; — that is to say, 
that the man-plasm was in an etheric state (30). 

31. The earth gradually hardens. Into the now more solid earth, the Creator and 
His obedient sons, the Gods who had not made revolt, poured forth the blessings 
of nature. This is described by the beautiful symbol of the hands of blessing, 
figured in Egypt as the sun-rays, each terminating in a hand for giving light and 
life. 368 

The imprisoned souls, the kinsmen of the Gods obedient, continue their revolt; 
they are the leaders of mankind, of a mankind far weaker than themselves, a 
humanity, apparently evolved normally from the nature of tilings and as yet in its 
childhood. Instead of teaching them the lessons of love and wisdom, the 
Disobedient Ones use them for evil purposes, for war and conflict, for oppression 
and savagery. 

32. Things go from bad to worse; the earth is befouled with the horrors of savage 
man, until in despair the pure elements complain to God. They pray that He will 
send a holy emanation of Himself to set things right (32-34). 

35. Hereupon God sends forth the mystery of a new birth, a divine descent, or 
emanation, an avatara , as the Aryan Hindu tradition would call it, a dual 
manifestation. 369 And so Osiris and Isis are born to help the world, to recall men 
from savagery, and restore the moral order (35-37). 

It was they who were taught directly by Hermes (37) in all law and science and 
wisdom. Their mission meets with success, and the “world” is filled with a 
knowledge of the Path of Return. But before their ascension into Heaven they have 
a petition to make to the Father, that not only earth but also the surrounding 
spaces up to Heaven itself may be filled with a knowledge of the truth. Thus then 
they proceed to hymn the Sire and Monarch of all in a praise-giving which, 
unfortunately, Stobasus did not think fit to copy. 

The original text of the “Virgin of the World” treatise is obviously broken only by 
the omission of the Hymn of Osiris and Isis, and Excerpt ii. follows otherwise 


368 Cf. Hermes-Prayer, iii. 3. 

369 This is of special interest as showing how the Egyptian tradition, in this pre-eminent above all others, did not limit 
the manifestation to the male sex alone. 


- 81 - 



immediately on Excerpt i. The subject is the birth of royal souls, taken up from the 
instruction given in K. K., 23, 24 above. 

39. There are four chief spaces: (i) Invisible Heaven, inhabited by the Gods, with 
the Invisible Sun as lord of all; (ii) fEther, inhabited by the Stars, of which for us the 
Sun is leader; (iii) Air, in which dwell non-incarnate souls, ruled by the Moon, as 
watcher o’er the paths of genesis; (iv) Earth, inhabited by men and animals, and 
over men the immediate ruler is the Divine King of the time. 

40. The king-soul is the last of the Gods but the first of men’ 70 ; he is, however, on 
earth a demigod only, for his true divinity is obscured. His soul, or ka, comes from 
a soul-plane superior to that of the rest of mankind. 

The ascending souls of normally evolving humanity are thought of, apparently, as 
describing ever widening circles in their wheelings in and out of incarnation, rising, 
as they increase in virtue and knowledge, at the zenith of their ascent in the 
intermediate state, before they turn to descend again into rebirth, ever nearer to the 
limits of the sensible world and, the frontiers of Heaven. 

41. But there is also another class of descending royal souls, who have only slightly 
transgressed, and therefore descend only as far as this grade of humanity. 

42. For the royal or ruling soul is not only a warrior monarch; his sovereignty may 
be also shown in arts of peace. He may be a righteous judge, a musician or poet, a 
truth-lover or philosopher. The activities of these souls are not determined, as is 
the case with souls of lower grades, — that is, those souls which have fallen deeper 
into material existence, — by what Basilides would have called the “appendages” of 
the animal nature; they are determined by a fairer taxis , an escort of angels and 
daimones, who accompany them into birth. 

43. The description of their manner of birth, however, is, unfortunately, lost to us, 
owing either to the hesitation of Stobasus to make it public, or to its being cut out 
by some subsequent copyist. 

44. We are next told that sex is no essential characteristic of the soul. It is an 
“accident” of the body, but this body is not the physical, but the “aery” body, 
which air, however, is not a simple element, but already differentiated into four 
sub-elements.’ 71 

45. Moreover the sight, or intelligence, of the soul also depends upon the purity of 
certain envelopes, which are called “airs,” — “airs” apparently more subtle even 
than the aery body (45). 372 

46. Next follows a naive reason for the excellence of Egypt and the wisdom of the 
Egyptians (46-48). Here the writer seems to be no longer dependent directly on the 
Trismegistic tradition, but is inserting and expanding popular notions. 


370 Cf C. H, xviii. 8 ff. 

371 The “spirituous” or “aery” body, or vehicle, is composed of the sub-elements, but in it is a predominance of the 
sub-element “air,” just as in the physical there is a predominance of “earth.” — Philoponus, Proam. in Aristot. de 
Amma\ see my Orpheus (London, 1896), “The Subtle Body,” pp. 276-281. Cf. also S. I. H., 15, 20. 

372 Compare this with the prana’s of Indian theosophy; see C. H., x. (xi.) 13, Comment. 


- 82 - 



49. The remaining sections of the Excerpt are taken up with speculations as to the 
cause of delirium (49, 50), and Stobasus brings his extract to a conclusion 
apparently without allowing the writer to complete his exposition. 

SOURCES? 

The discussion as to the meaning of the title, which has so far been invariably 
translated “The Virgin of the World,” will come more appropriately later on. 

How much of the original treatise has been handed on to us by S to He us we have 
no external means of deciding. Our two Extracts, however, plainly stand in 
immediate connection with each other, and the original text is broken only by the 
unfortunate omission of the Hymn of Osiris and Isis. The first Extract, moreover, 
is plainly not the beginning of the treatise, since it opens with words referring to 
what has gone before; while the second Extract ends in a very unsatisfactory 
manner in the middle of a subject. 

What we have, however, gives us some very interesting indications of how the 
writer regarded his sources, — whether written or oral, whether physical or psychic. 
He of course would have us take his treatise as a literary unity; and indeed the 
subject is so worked up that it is very difficult to discover what the literary sources 
that lay before the writer may have been, for the story runs on straight enough in 
the same thought-mould and literary form, in spite of the insertion of somewhat 
contradictory statements concerning the sources of information. 

When, however, Reitzenstein (p. 136) expressly states that the creation-story shows 
indubitable traces of two older forms, and that this is not a matter of surprise, as 
we find two (or more precisely four) different introductions, — we are not able 
entirely to follow him. It is true that these introductory statements are apparently at 
variance, but on further consideration they appear to be not really self- 
contradictory. 


THE DIRECT VOICE AND THE BOOKS OF HERMES 

The main representation is that the teacher of Isis is Hermes, who saw the world- 
creation, that is, the creation of our earth-system, and the soul-making, with his 
own spiritual sight (2). Isis has obtained her knowledge in two ways: either from 
the sacred Books of Hermes (4, 5); or by the direct spiritual voice of the Master 
(15). The intention here is plainly to claim the authority of direct revelation, for 
even the Books are not physical. They have disappeared, if indeed they ever were 
physical, and can only be recovered from the tablets of unseen nature, by ascending 
to the zones (5) where they are hidden; and these zones are plainly the same as the 
soul- spaces mentioned in S. I. H., 8. 

At the same time there is mention of another tradition, which, though in later 
details purporting to be historic and physical, in its beginnings is involved in purely 
mythological and psychic considerations. When the first and most ancient Hermes 
ascended to Heaven, he left his Books in the charge of the Gods, his kinsmen, in 
the zones, and not on earth (3). On earth there succeeded to this wisdom a younger 


- 83 - 



race, beloved of Hermes, and personified as his son Tat. These were souls as yet 
too young to understand the true science face to face. They were apparently 
regarded as the Tat (Thoth) priesthood of our humanity, who were subsequently 
joined by wisdom-lovers of another line of tradition, the Imuth (Asclepius) 
brotherhood, who had their doctrine originally from Ptah. 3 This seems to hint at 
some ancient union of two traditions or schools of mystic science, perhaps from 
the Memphitic and Thebaic priesthoods respectively. 374 

What, however, is clear is that the writer professes to set forth a higher and more 
direct teaching than either the received tradition of the Isiac mystery-cult or of the 
Tat- Asclepius school. This he does in the person of Isis as the face to face disciple 
of the most ancient Hermes 375 , 3 thus showing us that in the Hermes-circles of the 
Theoretics, or those who had the direct sight, though the Isis mystery-teaching was 
considered a tradition of the wisdom, it was nevertheless held to be entirely 
subordinate to the illumination of the direct sight. 

KAMEPHIS AND THE DARK MYSTERY 

In apparent contradiction to all this we have the following statement: “Now give 
good heed, son Horns, for thou art being told the mystic spectacle which 
Kamephis, our forefather, was privileged to hear from Hermes, the record-writer of 
all deeds, and I from Kamephis when he did honour me with the Black [Rite] that 
gives perfection” (19). 376 

Here Reitzenstein (p. 137) professes to discover the conflation of two absolutely 
distinct traditions of (i) Kamephis, a later god and pupil of Hermes, and (ii) 
Kamephis, an older god and teacher of Isis; but in this I cannot follow him. It all 
depends on the meaning assigned to the words Tiocqa xoti tiocvtcov nQoysvsozeQou, 
which Reitzenstein regards as signifying “the most ancient of all [gods],” but which 
I translate as “the most ancient of [us] all.” 

I take it to mean simply that, according to the general Isis -tradition, the founder of 
its mysteries was stated to be Kamephis, but that the Isis-Hermes circles claimed 
that this Kamephis, though truly the most ancient figure in the Isis tradition 
proper, was nevertheless in his turn the pupil of the still more ancient Hermes. 

The grade of Kamephis was presumably represented in the mystery-cult by the 
arch-hierophant who presided at the degree called the “Dark Mystery” or “Black 


373 Cf. Diog. Laert., Proam., i.: “The Egyptians say that Hephasstus (Ptah) was the son of Neilus (the Nile), and that he 
was the originator of philosophy, of that philosophy whose leaders are priests and prophets” — that is to say, a mystic 
philosophy of revelation. 

374 Thus Suidas ( s.v . “Ptah”) says that Ptah was the Hephasstus of the Memphite priesthood, and tells us that there 
was a proverbial saying current among them: “Ptah hath spoken unto thee.” This reminds us of our text: “As 
Hermes says when he speaks unto me.” 

375 The type of Isis as utterer of “sacred sermons,” describing herself as daughter or disciple of Hermes, is old, and 
goes back demonstrably to Ptolemaic times. R. 136, n. 4; 137, n. 1. 

376 ohot’ EfJLE nod t<S xeksiffl psXavi £ti(jiy]aev. This has hitherto been always supposed by the philological mind simply 
to refer to the mysteries of ink or writing, and that too without any humorous intent, but in all portentous solemnity. 
We must imagine, then, presumably, that it refers to the schooldays of Isis, when she was first taught the Egyptian 
equivalents for pothooks and hangers. This absurdity is repeated even by Meineke. 


- 84 - 


Rite.” It was a rite performed only for those who were judged worthy of it 
(8xt[X7]asv) after long probation in lower degrees, something of a far more sacred 
character, apparently, than the instruction in the mysteries enacted in the light. 

I would suggest, therefore, that we have here a reference to the most esoteric 
institution of the Isiac tradition, the more precise nature of which we will consider 
later on; it is enough for the moment to connect it with certain objects or shows 
that were apparently made to appear in the dark. As Clement of Alexandria says in 
his famous commonplace book, called the Stromateu 7 ' 

“It is not without reason that in the mysteries of the Greeks, lustrations hold the 
first place, analogous to ablutions among the Barbarians [that is, non-Greeks]. 
After these come the lesser mysteries, which have some foundation of instruction 
and of preliminary preparation for what is to follow; and then the great mysteries, 
in which nothing remains to be learned of the universe, but only to contemplate 
and comprehend nature [herself] and the tilings [which are mystically shown to the 
initiated].” 378 


KNEPH-KAMEPHIS 

But who was Kamephis in the theology of the Egyptians? According to 
Reitzenstein, Kamephis or Kmephis, that is Kmeph, is equated by Egyptologists 
with Kneph, who, according to Plutarch 379 , was worshipped in the Thebaid as the 
ingenerable and immortal God. Kneph, however, as Sethe has shown 380 , is one of 
the aliases of Ammon, who is the “bull [or husband] of his mother,” the “creator 
who has created himself.” Kneph is, moreover, the Good Daimon, as Philo of 
Byblus says. 381 He is the Sun-god and Heaven-god Ammon. 

“If he open his eyes, he filleth all with light in his primaeval ’ 8- land; and if he close 
them all is dark.” 383 


377 The more correct title of this work should be “Gnostic Jottings (or Notes) according to the True Philosophy,” as 
Clement states himself and as has been well remarked by Hort in his Ante-Nicene Fathers, p. 87 (London, 1895). 

378 Op. tit., v. 11 . Sopater (Dist. Qnast., p. 123, ed. Walz) speaks of these as “figures” (ayf](juxxa), the same expression 
which Proclus (In Flat. Rep., p. 380) employs in speaking of the appearances which the Gods assume in their 
manifestations; Plato ( Phadr ., p. 250) calls them “blessed apparitions,” or beatific visions” (suSalpova tpaapaxa); the 
author of the Fpinon/is (p. 986) describes them as “what is most beautiful to see in the world”; these are the “mystic 
sights” or “wonders” (puaxixa Osapaxa) of Dion Chrysostom ( Orat ., xii., p. 387, ed. Reiske); the “holy appearances” 
(ayia cpocvxaajjuxxa) and “sacred shows” (isga Seixvupeva) of Plutarch (Wyttenbach, Fragm., vi. 1, t. v., p. 722, and De 
Project. Virtut. Sent., p. 81, ed. Reiske); the “ineffable apparitions” (aggt]xa tpaapaxa) of Aristides (Orat., xix. p. 416, 
ed. Dindorf); the “divine apparitions” (Osta tpaapaxa) of Himerius (Eclog., xxxii., p. 304, ed. Wemsdorf), — those 
sublime sights the memory of which was said to accompany the souls of the righteous into the after-life, and when 
they returned to birth. Cf. Lenormant (F.) on “The Eleusinian Mysteries” in The Contemporary Review (Sept. 1880), p. 
416, who, however, thinks that these famous philosophers and writers bankrupted their adjectives merely for the 
mechanical figures and stage-devices of the lower degrees. See my “Notes on the Eleusinian Mysteries” in The 
Theosophical Review (April, May, June, 1898), vol. xxii., p. 156. 

379 De Is. et Or., xxi. 

380 Berl phil. Wochenschr. (1896), p. 1528; R. 137, n. 3. 

381 R. 133, n. 2. 

382 Ttgotoyovcp — cf. the Ttgoyevecrxegou Ttavxwv above. 

383 Epeius, ap. Eusebius, Prap. Ev., i. 10, p. 41 D. 


- 85 - 



Here we have Kneph- Ammon as the giver of light in darkness, and the opener of 
the eyes. 

Moreover, Porphyry 384 tells us that the Egyptians regarded Kneph as the demiurge 
or creator, and represented him in the form of a man, with skin of a blue-black tint, 
girt with a girdle, and holding a sceptre, and wearing a crown of regal wings. This 
symbolism, says Porphyry, signified that he was the representative of the Logos or 
Reason, difficult to discover, hidden 385 , not manifest 386 ; it is he who gives light and 
also life’ 87 ; he is the King. The winged crown upon Inis head, he adds, signifies that 
he moves or energizes intellectually. 

Kamephis, then, stands in the Isis-tradition for the representative of 
Agathodaimon, the Logos-creator. He is, however, a later holder of this office, and 
has had it handed on to him by Hermes, or at any rate he is instructed in the 
Logos-wisdom by Hermes. 

HERMES I. AND HERMES II. 

In this connection it is instructive to refer to the account which Syncellus"’ 88 tells us 
he took from the statement of Manetho. 

Manetho, says Syncellus, states in his Books, that he based his replies concerning 
the dynasties of Egypt to King Ptolemy on the monuments. 

“[These monuments], he [Manetho] tells us, were engraved in the sacred 
language, and in the characters of the sacred writing by Thoth the First 
Hermes; after the Flood they were translated from the sacred language into 
the then common tongue, but [still written] in hieroglyphic characters, and 
stored away in books, by the Good Damon’ s son, the Second Hermes, the 
father of Tat, in the inner shrines of the temples of Egypt. ” 

Here we have a tradition, going back as far as Manetho, which I have shown, in 
Chapter V. of the “Prolegomena” on “Manetho, High Priest of Egypt,” cannot be 
so lighdy disposed of as has been previously supposed, — dealing expressly with the 
Books of Hermes. 

This tradition, it is true, differs from the account given in our Sermon (3-5), where 
the writer says nodiing expressly of a flood, but evidendy wishes us to believe that 
the most ancient records of Hermes were magically hidden in the zones of the 
unseen world, and that the flood, if there was one, was a flood or lapse of time that 
had utterly removed these records from the earth. For him they no longer existed 
physically. 


384 Ap. Euseb., Prop-, iii. 11, 45, p. 115. 

385 Cf. the epithet “utterly hidden” found in the “Words ( Logoi ) of Ammon,” referred to by Justin Martyr, Cohort ., 
xxxviii., and the note thereon in “Fragments from the Fathers.” 

386 Typified by the dark-coloured body. 

387 Cwo7toio? — typified, presumably, by the girdle (the symbol of the woman) and the staff (the symbol of the man). 

388 Chron., xl. (ed. Dind., i. 72). 


- 86 - 



Manetho’s account deals with another view of the matter. His tradition appears to 
be as follows. The oldest records were on stone monuments which had survived 
some great flood in Egypt. These records belonged to the period of the First 
Hermes, the Good Daimon par excellence , the priesthood, therefore, of the earliest 
antediluvian Egyptian civilization. After the flood they were translated from the 
most archaic language into ancient Egyptian, and preserved in book-form by the 
Second Hermes, the priesthood, presumably, of the most ancient civilization after 
the flood, who were in time succeeded by the Tat priesthood. 

That this tradition is elsewhere contradicted by the Isis-tradition proper, which in a 
somewhat similar genealogy places Isis at the very beginning prior even to Hermes 
I. 389 , need not detain us, since each tradition would naturally claim the priority of 
those whom it regarded as its own special founders, and we are for the moment 
concerned only with the claims of the Hermes-school. 

The main point of interest is that there was a tradition which explained the past on 
the hypothesis of periods of culture succeeding one another, — the oldest being 
supposed to have been the wisest and highest; the most archaic hieroglyphic 
language, which perhaps the priests of Manetho’s day could no longer fully 
understand’ 90 , was supposed to have been the tongue of the civilization before the 
Flood of Hermes I. It may even be that the remains of this tongue were preserved 
only in the magical invocations, as a tiring most sacred, the “language of the gods.” 

The point of view, however, of the circle to which our writer belonged, was that 
the records of this most ancient civilization were no longer to be read even in the 
oldest inscriptions; they could only be recovered by spiritual sight. Into close 
relation with this, we must, I think, bring the statement made in § 37, that Osiris 
and Isis, though they themselves had learned all the secrets of the records of 
Hermes, nevertheless kept part of them secret, and engraved on stone only such as 
were adapted for the intelligence of “mortal men.” 

The Kamephis of the Isis-tradition, then, apparently stands for Kneph as 
Agathodaimon, that is for Hermes, but not for our Hermes I. 391 , for he has no 
physical contact with the Isis-tradition, but for Hermes II., who was taught by 
Hermes I. 


THE BLACK RITE 

But what is the precise meaning of the “black rite” at which Kamephis presides? I 
have already suggested the environment in which the general meaning may be 
sought, though I have not been able to produce any objective evidence of a precise 


389 Varro, De Gente Pop. Rom., ap. Augustine, De Civ. Dei, xviii. 3, 8; R. 139, n. 3. 

390 It is said that with regard to ancient archaic texts which are still extant, modern Egyptology is able to translate 
them with greater accuracy than the priests of Manetho’s day; but this one may be allowed to question, unless the 
ancient texts are capable solely of a physical interpretation. 

391 The Hermes, presumably, who was fabled to be the son of the Nile, not the physical Nile, but the Heaven Ocean, 
the Great Green, the Soul of Cosmos, and whom, we are told, the Egyptians would never speak of publicly, but, 
presumably, only within the circles of initiation. This Nile may be in one sense the Flood that hid the Books of 
Hermes in its depths or zones; but equally so the son of Nile may be the first Hermes after the Flood. 


- 87 - 



nature. Reitzenstein (pp. 139 f£), however, thinks he has discovered that evidence. 
His view is as follows: 

The key to the meaning, according to him, is to be found in the following line from 
a Magic Papyrus 392 : 

“ I invoke thee, Lady Isis, with whom the Good Daimon doth unite 393 ' , He 
who is Lord sv rep zsXsicp jisXavi. ” 

Reitzenstein thinks that the Good Daimon here stands for Chnum, and works out 
(p. 140) a learned hypothesis that the “black” refers to a certain territory of black 
earth, between Syene and Takompso, the Dedocaschoenus, especially famed for its 
pottery, which was originally in the possession of the Isis priesthood, but was 
subsequendy transferred to the priesthood of Chnum by King Doser. Reitzenstein 
would thus, presumably, translate the latter half of the sentence as “the Good 
Daimon who is Lord in the perfect black [country],” and so make it refer to 
Chnum, though indeed he seems himself to feel the inadequacy of this explanation 
to cover the word “perfect” (p. 144). But this seems to me to take all the dignified 
meaning out of both our text and that of the Magic Papyrus, and to introduce local 
geographical considerations which are plainly out of keeping with the context. 

It is far more natural to make the Agathodaimon of the Papyrus refer to Osiris; for 
indeed it is one of his most frequent designations. Moreover, it is precisely Osiris 
who is pre-eminently connected with the so-called “under world,” the unseen 
world, the “mysterious dark.” He is lord there, while Isis remains on earth; it is he 
who would most fitly give instructions on such matters, and indeed one of the 
ancient mystery-sayings was precisely, “Osiris is a dark God.” 394 

“He who is Lord in the perfecting black,” might thus mean that Osiris, the 
masculine potency 395 of the soul, purified and perfected the man on the mysterious 
dark side of things, and completed the work which Isis, the feminine potency of 
the soul, had begun on him. 

That, in the highest mystery-circles, this was some stage of union of the man with 
the higher part of himself, may be deduced from the interesting citations made by 
Reitzenstein (pp. 142-144) from the later Alchemical Hermes-literature; it clearly 
refers to the mystic “sacred marriage,” 396 the intimate union of the soul with the 
logos , or divine ray. Much could be written on this subject, but it will be sufficient to 
append two passages of more than ordinary interest. The Jewish over-writer of the 
Naassene Document contends that the chief mystery of the Gnosis was but the 
consummation of the instruction given in the various mystery-institutions of the 
nations. The Lesser Mysteries, he tells us, commenting on the text of the Pagan 
commentator, pertained to “fleshly generation,” whereas the Greater dealt with the 


392 Wessley, Denkschr. d. k. Akad. (1893), p. 37, 1. 500. 

393 So R., though this is a meaning to which the lexicons give no support; the verb generally meaning “to defer” or 
“assent to.” 

394 Compare also the mystery ritual in The Acts oj John: “I am thy God, not that of the betrayer” ( F . F. F., p. 434). 

395 As the Gnostic Marcus would have called it. 

396 On this is go? yapo? or yapo? Ttvsupa-uxo?, see Lobeck (C. A.), Aglaophanms (Konigsberg, 1829), 608, 649, 651. 


- 88 - 



new birth, or second birth, with regeneration, and not with genesis. And speaking 
of a certain mystery, he says: 

“For this is the Gate of Heaven , and this is the House of God, inhere the 
Good God 397 dwells alone, into which [House] no impure [man] shall 
come; hut it is kept under watch for the spiritual alone; where when they 
come they must cast away their garments, and all become bridegrooms 
obtaining their true manhood through the Virginal Spirit. For such a man 
is the Virgin big with child, conceiving and bearing a Son, not psychic, not 
fleshly, but a blessed Mon of Mons. ” m 

In the marvellous mystery-ritual of the new-found fragments of The Vets of John, 
lately discovered in a fourteenth century MS. in Vienna, disguised in hymn form, 
and hiding an almost inexhaustible mine of very early tradition, the “sacred 
marriage” is plainly suggested as one of the keys to part of the ritual. Compare, for 
instance, widi the “casting away of their garments,” in the above-quoted passage of 
the Naassene writer, the following: 

“[The Disciple.] I would flee. 

[The Master. ] I would [have thee] stay. 

[The Assistants.] Amen ! 

[The Disciple.] I would be robed. 

[The Master. ] And I would robe [thee]. 

[The Assistants.] Amen! 

[The Disciple.] I would be at-oned. 

[The Master. ] And I would at-one. 

[The Assistants.] Amen! ” 399 


BLACK LAND. 

But to return to the “mysterious black.” Plutarch tells us: “Moreover, they [the 
Egyptians] call Egypt, inasmuch as its soil is particularly black, as though it were the 
black of the eye, Chemia, and compare it with the heart,” 400 — for, he adds, it is hot 
and moist, and set in the southern part of the inhabitable world, in the same way as 
the heart in the left side of a man . 401 


397 That is, the Agathodaimon. 

398 That is, the “Birth of Homs.” Hippolytus, Philos., v. 8 (ed. Dunk, and Schneid, pp. 164, 166, 11. 86-94). see “Myth 
of Man in the Mysteries,” § 28. The last clause is the gloss of the later Christian over-writer. 

399 The text is to be found in James (M. R.), Apocrypha Anecdota, ii. (Cambridge, 1897), in Texts and Studies-, F. F. F., pp. 
432, 433. 

400 De Is. et Os., xxxiii. 

401 Cf. this with K. K, 47, where Egypt is said to occupy the position of the heart of the earth. 


- 89 - 



Egypt, the “sacred land ” par excellence , was called Chemia or Chem (Hem), Black- 
land, because of the nature of its dark loamy soil; it was, moreover, in symbolic 
phraseology the black of the eye, that is, the pupil of the earth-eye, the stars and 
planets being regarded as the eyes of the gods. 402 Egypt, then, was the eye and heart 
of the Earth; the Heavenly Nile poured its light-flood of wisdom through this dark 
of the eye, or made the land throb like a heart with the celestial life-currents. 

Nor is the above quotation an unsupported statement of Plutarch’s, for in an 
ancient text from Edfu 403 , we read: “Egypt (lit. the Black), which is so called after 
the eye of Osiris, for it is his pupil.” 

Ammon-Kneph, too, as we have seen, is black, or blue-black, signifying his hidden 
and mysterious character; and in the above-quoted passage he is called “he who 
holds himself hidden in his eye,” or “he who veils himself in his pupil.” 

This pupil, then, concludes Reitzenstein (p. 145), is the “mysterious black.” Is this, 
then, the origin of this peculiar phrase? If so, it would be connected with seeing, 
the spiritual sight, the true Hpopleia. 

THE PUPIL OF THE WORLD’S EYE 

But Isis, also, is the black earth, and, therefore, the pupil of the eye of Osiris, and, 
therefore, also of the Chnum or Ammon identified with Osiris at Syene. Isis, 
therefore, herself is the “Pupil of the World’s Eye” — the xoqr] xoctjiou . 404 

Reitzenstein would, therefore, have it that the original type of our treatise looks 
back to a tradition which makes the mystery-goddess Isis the disciple and spouse of 
the mysterious Chnum or Ammon, or Kneph or Kamephis, as Agathodaimon; and, 
therefore, presumably, that the making of this Kamephis the disciple in his turn of 
Hermes is a later development of the tradition, when the Hermes -communities 
gained ascendancy in certain circles of the Isis-tradition. 

This is very probable; but dare we, widi Reitzenstein, cast aside the “traditional” 
translation of xoqr] xoctjiou, as “Virgin of the World,” and prefix to our treatise as 
title the new version, “The Pupil of the Eye of the World”? It certainly sounds 
strange as a title to unaccustomed ears, and differs widely from any other titles of 
the Hermetic sermons known to us. But what does the “Virgin of the World” mean 
in connection with our treatise? Isis as the Virgin Mother is a familiar idea to 
students of Egyptology 405 ; she is xocx ' Zpr/J\'j, the “World-Virgin.” 


402 Cf. K. K, 20: “Ye brilliant stars, eyes of the gods.” 

403 Cited by Ebers, “Die Korperteile in Altagyptischen,” Abh. d. k. bajr. Akad. (1897), p. Ill, where other references 
are given. 

404 Compare also the Naassene document, § 8, in the “Myth of Man” chapter of the Prolegomena, where Isis is called 
“the seven-robed and black-mantled goddess.” 

405 Cf. “Isis, the Queen of Heaven, whose most ancient and distinctive title was the Virgin Mother.” Marsham Adams 
(F.), The Took of the Master, or the Tgyptian Doctrine of the Tight born of the Virgin Mother (London, 1898), p. 63. 


- 90 - 



THE SON OF THE VIRGIN 


And here it will be of interest to turn to a curious statement of Epiphanius 406 ; it is 
missing in all editions of this Father prior to that of Dindorf (Leipzig, 1859), which 
was based on the very early (tenth century) Codex Marcianus 125, all previous 
editions being printed from a severely censured and bowdlerized fourteenth 
century MS. 

Epiphanius is stating that the true birthday of the Christ is the Feast of Epiphany, 
“at a distance of thirteen days from the increase of the light [i.e. December 25]; for it needs must 
have been that this should be a figure of our Lord Jesus Christ Himself and of His twelve 
disciples, who make up the thirteen days of the increase of the Light. ” The Feast of the 
Epiphany was a great day in Egypt, connected with the “Birth of the fEon,” — a 
phase of the “Birth of Horus.” For Epiphanius thus continues: 

“LI dip many other things in the past and present support and bear witness 
to this proposition, I mean the birth of Christ! Indeed, the leaders of the 
idol- cults 407 , filled with wiles to deceive the idol-worshippers ivho believe in 
them, in many places keep highest festival on this same night of Epiphany 
[— the Manifestation to Eight], so that they whose hopes are in error may 
not seek the truth. For instance, at Alexandria, in the Koreion 408 , as it is 
called — an immense temple, that is to say the Precinct of the Virgin — after 
they have kept all-night vigil with songs and music, chanting to their idol, 
when the vigil is over, at cock-crow, they descend with lights into an 
underground crypt, and carry up a wooden image lying naked on a litter, 
with the seal of a cross made in gold on its forehead, and on either hand 
two similar seals, and on either knee two others, all five seals being 
similarly made in gold. And they carry round the image itself, 
circumambulating seven times the innermost temple, to the accompaniment 
of pipes, tabors and hymns, and with merry-making they carry it down 
again underground. And if they are asked the meaning of this mystery, they 
answer: ‘To-day at this hour the Maiden (Kore), that is, the Virgin, gave 
birth to the JEon. 

He further adds that at Petra, in Arabia, where, among other places, this mystery 
was also performed, the Son of the Virgin is called by a name meaning the “Alone- 
begotten of the Lord.” 4119 

Here, then, at Alexandria, in every probability the very environment of our treatise, 
we have a famous mystery-rite, solemnized in the Temple of the Virgin, who gives 


406 Hcer., li. 22. 

407 And pre-eminently, therefore, for Epiphanius, the Egyptians. 

408 That is, the Temple of Kore. This can hardly be the Temple of Persephone, as Dindorf (iii. 729) suggests, but 
rather the Temple of Isis. 

m Cf.D.J.L.,pp. 407 ff. 


-91 - 



birth to a Son, the /Eon. This, we shall not be rash in assuming, signifies not only 
the birth of the new year, but also still more profound mysteries, when we 
remember the words of the Naassene Document quoted above: “For such a man is 
the Virgin, big with child, conceiving and bearing a Son, — not psychic, not fleshly 
[nor, we may add, temporal], but a blessed /Eon of /Eons” — that is, an Eternity of 
Eternities, an immortal God. 

We should also notice the crowing of the cock, which plays so important a part in 
the crucifixion-story in the Gospels 410 , and above all things the stigmata on the 
image, the symbols of a cosmic and human mystery. 

THE MYSTERY OF THE BIRTH OF HORUS 

In our own treatise the mysterious Birth of Horns is also referred to (35, 36) as 
follows. 

Isis has handed on the tradition of the Coming of Osiris, the Divine emanation, the 
descent of the efflux of the Supreme, and Horns asks: “How was it, mother, then, 
that Earth received God’s efflux?” — where Earth may well refer to the “Dark 
Earth,” a synonym of Isis herself. 

And Isis answers: “I may not tell the story of [this] birth; for it is not permitted to 
describe the origin of this descent, O Horns, [son] of mighty power, lest afterward 
the way of birth of the immortal Gods should be known unto men.” 

Here I think we have a clear reference to the mysterious “Birth of Horns,” the 
birth of the gods, — that is to say, of how a man becomes a god, becomes the most 
royal of all souls, gains the kingdom, or lordship over himself. This mystery was 
not yet to be revealed to the neophyte — Horns — and yet this Birth is suggested to 
Tat by Hermes — C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 2 — when he says: “Wisdom that understands in 
silence [such is the matter and the womb from out which Man is born] and the 
True Good the Seed.” 

The womb is the mysterious Silence, the matter is Wisdom, Isis herself, the seed is 
the Good, the Agathodaimon, Osiris. 

But in our treatise Horns has not yet reached to this high state; Isis, as the 
introductory words tell us, is pouring forth for him “the first draught of 
immortality” only, “which souls have custom to receive from gods”; he is being 
raised to the understanding of a daimon, but not as yet to that of a god. 

All of this, moreover, seems to have been part and parcel of the Isis mystery- 
tradition proper, for as Diodorus (i. 25), following Hecatams, informs us, it was Isis 
who “discovered the philtre of immortality, by means of which, when her son 
Horns, who had been plotted against by the Titans, and found dead (vsxqov) 
beneath the water, not only raised him to life (avocaiTjaai) by giving him life 
(<j>uyf]v), but also made him sharer in immortality.” 


410 Though some have conjectured that the “cock” was the popular name for the Temple -watchman who called the 
hours. 


- 92 - 



Here we have evidence to show that in the mystery-myth Horns was regarded as 
the human soul, and that there were two interpretations of the mystery. It referred 
not only to the “rising from the dead” in another body, or return to life in another 
enfleshment, but also to a still higher mystery, whereby the consciousness of 
immortality was restored to the memory of the soul. The soul had been cast by the 
Titans, or the opposing powers of the subde universe, into the deep waters of the 
Great Sea, the Ocean of Generation, or Celestial Nile, for as the mysterious 
informant of Cleombrotus told him 41 , these stories of Titans concerned daimons 
or souls proper, not bodies . 412 

From this death in the sea of matter, Isis, the Mother Soul, brings Horns repeatedly 
back to life, and finally bestows on him the knowledge of immortality, and so raises 
him from the “dead.” 41 ’ 

This birth of the “true man” within, the logos , was and is for man the chief of all 
mysteries. In the Chapter on “The Popular Theurgic Hermes-Cult,” we have 
already, in elucidation of the sacramental formula, “Thou art I and I am thou,” 
quoted the agraphon from the Gospel of Eve concerning the Great Man and the Little 
Man or Dwarf, and lovers of the Aupanishad literature of Hindu- Aryan theosophy 
need hardly be reminded of “the ‘man,’ of the size of a thumb,” within, in the ether 
of the heart . 414 


411 See below, where the story is given from Plutarch’s Moralia. 

412 Compare The Book of the Deaf lxxviii. 31, 32; Budge’s Trans. (London, 1901), ii. 255: “I shall come forth . . . into 
the House of Isis, the divine lady. I shall behold sacred things which are hidden, and I shall be led on to the secret 
and holy things, even as they have granted unto me to see the birth of the Great God. Horns hath made me to be a 
spiritual body through his soul, [and I see what is therein].” Compare the last sentence with C. H., i. 7, and xi. (xii.) 6, 
where the pupil “sees” by means of the soul of his Master. 

413 This passage, I believe, affords us an objective point of departure for the reconsideration of C. W. Leadbeater’s 
statement, in his Christian Creed (London, 1898), p, 45, that “Pontius Pilate” is a pseudo-historical gloss for tiovto:; 
TtiXrjxog, the “dense sea” of “matter,” into which the soul is plunged. See for a discussion of this hypothesis D. T. L., 
pp. 423 ff. 

In connection with this a colleague has supplied me with an exceedingly interesting note from Texts and Studies, 
iv. 2, Coptic Apocryphal Gospels, p. 177, Frag. 4. The Sahidic text is found in Rendiconti della R. Accademia dei 
Lincei, vol. iii., sem. 2, pp. 381-384 (Frammenti Copti, Nota Via), by Ignazio Guidi (1887). The legend runs that the 
Devil taking “the form of a fisherman,” goes fishing, and is met by Jesus as He was coming down from the Mount 
with His disciples. The Devil announces that “he who catcheth fish here, he is the Master. It is not a wonder to catch 
fish in the waters, the wonder is in this desert, to catch fish therein.” They then have a trial of skill, but the MS. 
unfortunately breaks off before the result is told. It is in this Fragment that the following remarkable sentence 
occurs: “Now as Pilate was saying these things before the authorities of Tiberius, the king, Herod, could not refrain 
from setting Pilate at naught, saying, ‘Thou art a Galilasan foreign Egyptian Pontus.’” The literal translation from the 
Coptic runs: “Thou art a Pontus Galilasan foreign Egyptian.” 

414 Compare, for instance, Kathopanishad, Sec. ii., Pt. ii., iv. 11, 12: “The Man, of the size of a thumb, resides in the 
midst, within in the self, of the past and the future the lord; from him a man hath no desire to hide. This verily is 
That. 

“The Man, of the size of a thumb, like flame free from smoke, of past and of future the lord, the same is to-day, 
to-morrow the same will he be. This verily is That.” — Mead and Chattopadhyaya’s Trans. (London, 1896), i. 68, 69. 

Here “to-day” and “to-morrow” are said by some to refer to different incarnations; the “Man” (purusha) being the 
potential Self, destined finally to become, or grow into the stature of, the Great Self (Maha-purusha). 


- 93 - 



“ISHON” 

But what is of more immediate interest is that the same idea is to some extent 
found in the Old Covenant documents, especially in the Prophetical and Wisdom 
literature, which latter was strongly influenced by Hellenistic ideas. 

Ishon , which literally means “little man” or “dwarf,” 41 " is in A.V. generally translated 
“apple of the eye.” 416 

Thus we read in a purely literal sense, referring to weeping: “Let not die apple of 
thine eye cease” (Lam. ii. 18). 

It was, however, a common persuasion, that the intelligence or soul itself, not 
merely the reflection of the image of another person, resided in the eye, and was 
made manifest chiefly by the eye. 

Thus the “apple of the eye” was used as a synonym for a man’s most precious 
possession, the treasure-house as it were of the light of a man. 

And so we read: “He [Yahweh | kept him [Israel] as the apple of his eye” (Ps. xvii. 
8) — where ishon is in the Hebrew further glossed as the “daughter of the eye”; and 
again: “Thus saith the Lord of Hosts: . . . He that toucheth you toucheth the apple 
of his eye” (Zech. ii. 8). 

The “apple of the eye” {ishon) was, then, something of great value, something very 
precious, and, therefore, we read in the Wisdom-literature that the punishment of 
the man who curses his father and mother is that “his lamp shall be put out in 
obscure {ishon) darkness” (Prov. xx. 20) — that is, that he shall thus extinguish the 
lamp of his intelligence, or perhaps spiritual nature, “in the apple of his eye there 
will be darkness”; and this connects with a passage in the Psalms which shows 
traces of the same Wisdom-teaching. “In the hidden part 417 [of man] thou shalt 
make me to know wisdom” (Ps. Ii. 6). 

But the most striking passages are to be found in that pre-eminently Wisdom- 
chapter in the Proverbs-collection, where the true Israelite is warned to remain 
faithful to the Law (Torah), and to have no commerce with the “strange woman,” 
the “harlot” — that is, the “false doctrines” of the Gentiles. 418 

“Keep my law as the apple of thine eye” (Prov. vii. 2), says the writer, speaking in 
the name of Yahweh, for he has seen the young and foolish being led astray by the 
“strange woman.” “He went the way to her house, in the twilight, in the evening; in 
the black {ishon) and dark night” (Prov. vii. 9). That is to say, his lamp was put out; 
there was dark night in his eye, in that little man of his, which should be his true 
light-spark understanding the wisdom of Yahweh. 


415 See the article, “Theosophic Light on Bible Shadows,” in The TheosophicalRevieiv (Nov. 1904), xxxv. 230, 231. 

416 The minute image of a person reflected in the pupil of the eye of another may to some extent account for the 
popular belief underlying this identification. 

417 The same idea which we found above in connection with Ammon. 

418 To go “a-whoring” after strange gods and strange doctrines was the graphic figure invariably employed by 
Hebrew orthodoxy; “to commit fornication” not unfrequently echoes the same idea in the New Testament. 


- 94 - 



Here, I think, we have additional evidence, that the idea, that the pupil of the eye 
was the seat of the spiritual intelligence in man, was widespread in Hellenistic 
circles. 419 But even so, can we translate xoqr] xoajxou as the “Apple of the World- 
Eye”? It is true that Isis is the instrument or organ of conveying the hidden wisdom 
to Horus, and that it is eventually Hermes or the Logos who is the true light itself, 
which shines through her, the pupil of Egypt’s eye 420 , out of that mysterious 
darkness, in which she found herself, when she received illumination at the hands 
of Kamephis; but is this sufficient justification for rejecting the traditional 
translation of the title, and adopting a new version? 

On the whole I am inclined to think, that though the new rendering may at first 
sight appear somewhat strained, nevertheless in proportion as we become more 
familiarized with the idea and remember the thought-environment of the time, we 
may venture so to translate it. Isis, then, is the “Apple or Pupil of the Eye of 
Osiris.” On earth the “mysterious black” is Egypt herself, the wisdom-land. Isis is 
the mysterious wisdom of Egypt, but in our treatise she is even more than this, for 
she is that wisdom but now truly illumined by the direct sight, the new dawn of the 
Trismegistic discipline of which she speaks (4). 


To a Greek, however, the word xbpy would combine and not distinguish the two 
meanings of the title over which we have been labouring; but even as logos meant 
both “word” and “reason,” so kore would mean both “virgin” and “pupil of the 
eye”; but as it is impossible to translate it in English by one word, we have followed 
the traditional rendering. 


THE SIXTY SOUL-REGIONS 

We now turn to a few of the most important points which require more detailed 
treatment than the space of a footnote can accommodate. There are, of course, 
many other points that could be elaborated, but if that were done, the present work 
would run into volumes. 

The number of degrees into which the soul-stuff (psychosis) is divided, is given as 
three, and as sixty (10). If this statement stood by itself we should have been 
somewhat considerably puzzled to have known what to make of it, even when we 
remembered the mystic statement that 60 is par excellence the number of the soul, 
and that he who can unriddle the enigma will know its nature. 

Fortunately, however, if we turn to S. I. H., 6 (Ex. xxvii.), we find that according to 
this tradition the soul-regions also were divided into 60 spaces, presumably 
corresponding to the types of souls. 


419 For the latest study on the subject, see Monseur (E.), “L’Ame Pupilline,” Rer. de I’Hist. des Relig. (Jan. and Feb. 
1905), who discusses the significance in primitive religion of the reflected image to be seen in the pupil of the eye. 
This “little man” of the eye was taken to be its soul, and to control all its functions. 

420 Cf., for the idea in the mind of the ancients, Tim. 45 B: “So much of the fire as would not burn, but gave a gentle 
light, they formed into a substance akin to the light of every-day life; and the pure fire which is within us and related 
thereto they made to flow through the eyes in a stream smooth and dense, compressing the whole eye, and especially 
the centre part, so that it kept out everything of a coarser nature, and allowed to pass only this pure element.” 


- 95 - 



They were in 4 main divisions and 60 special spaces, with no overlapping (7). These 
spaces were also called zones, firmaments or layers. 

We are further told (6) that the lowest division, that is the one nearest to the earth, 
consists of 4 spaces; the second, of 8; the third, of 16; and the fourth, of 32. 

And still further (7), that there were besides the 4 main divisions 12 intervallic ones. 
This introduces an element of uncertainty, for, as far as I am aware, we have no 
objective information which can enable us to determine how the intervallic 
divisions were located in the mind of the writer; speculation is rash, but a scheme 
has suggested itself to me, and I append it with all reservation. 

First of all we have 4 main divisions or planes, separated from one another by 3 
determinations of some sort, for the whole ordering pertains to the Air proper, and 
perhaps the 4 states of Air were regarded as earthy, watery, aery, and fiery Air. The 
3 determinations may perhaps have been regarded as corresponding to the three 
main grades or florescences of the soul-stuff, which were apparently of a superior 
substance. 

Each division of the 4 may further have been regarded as divided off by three 
intervallic determinations; so that we should have 3 such intervals in the lowest 
division, subdividing it into 4 spaces of 1 space each; 3 in the second, subdividing it 
into 4 spaces of 2 spaces each; 3 in the third, subdividing it into 4 spaces of 4 
spaces each; and 3 in the fourth, subdividing it into 4 spaces of 8 spaces each. The 
sum of these intervals would thus be 1 2. 

PLUTARCH’S YOGIN 

In this connection, however, I cannot refrain from appending a pleasant story told 
by Plutarch. 4 " 1 

The speaker is Cleombrotus, a Lacedtemonian gentleman and man of means, who 
was a great traveller, and a greedy collector of information of all sorts to form the 
basis of a philosophical religion. He had spent much time in Egypt, and had also 
been a voyage beyond the Red Sea. On his travels Cleombrotus had heard of a 
philosopher-recluse, who lived in complete retirement, except once a year when he 
was seen by “the folk round the Red Sea”; then it was that a certain divine 
inspiration came upon him, and he came forth and “prophesied” to the nobles and 
royal scribes who used to flock to hear him. With great difficulty, and only after the 
expenditure of much money, Cleombrotus discovered the hermitage of this recluse, 
and was granted a courteous reception. 

Our old philosopher was the handsomest man Cleombrotus had ever met, deeply 
versed in the knowledge of plants, and a great linguist. With Cleombrotus, 
however, he spoke Doric, and almost in verse, and “as he spake perfume filled the 
place from the sweetness of Inis breath.” 


421 De Defect n Oracnlomw , xxi., xxii. (421A-422C), ed. G. N. Bernardakis (Leipzig, 1891), iii. 97-101. See my paper, 
“Plutarch’s Yogi,” in The Theosophical Review (Dec. 1891), ix. 295-297. 


- 96 - 



His knowledge of die various mystery-cults was profound, and his intimate 
acquaintance with the unseen world remarkable; he explained many tilings to 
Cleombrotus, and especially the nature of the daimones, and the important part 
they played as factors in any satisfactory interpretation of ancient mythology, seeing 
that most of the great myths referred to the doings of the daimones and not of 
mortals. 

Cleombrotus, however, has told his story merely as an introduction to the 
quotation of a scrap of information let fall by the old philosopher concerning the 
plurality of worlds 422 ; thus, then, he continues: 

“THE PLAIN OF TRUTH” 

“He told me that the number of worlds was neither infinite, nor one, nor 
five, but that there were 183 of them, arranged in the figure of a triangle of 
which each side contained 60, and of the remaining 3 one set at each angle. 

And those on the sides touch each other, revolving steadily as in a choral 
dance. And the area of the triangle is the Common Hearth of all, and is 
called the ‘Plain of Truth, 423 in which the logoi and ideas and paradigms 
of all things which have been, and which shall be, lie immovable; and the 
Mon [or Eternity] being round them [sc. the ideas], time flows down upon 
the worlds like a stream. And the sight and contemplation ( dear) of these 
things is possible for the souls of men only once in ten thousand years, 
should they have lived a virtuous life. And the highest of our initiations 
here below is only the dream of that true vision and initiation 424 ; and the 
discourses [sc. delivered in the mystic rites] have been carefully devised to 
awaken the memory of the sublime things above, or else are to no purpose. ” 


This statement I am inclined to regard as one of the most distinct pronouncements 
on the nature of the higher mysteries which has been preserved to us from 
antiquity, and the locus classicus and point of departure for any really fruitful 
discussion of the true nature of the philosophic mysteries, and yet I have never 
seen it referred to in this connection. 

Our old philosopher was well acquainted with the Egyptian mystery-tradition, for 
Cleombrotus obtained information from him concerning the esoteric significance 


422 In this referring to the passage in the Timaus, (55 C D), which runs: “Now, he who, duly reflecting on all this, 
enquires whether the worlds are to be regarded as indefinite or definite in number, will be of opinion that the notion 
of their indefiniteness is characteristic of a sadly indefinite and ignorant mind. He, however, who raises the question 
whether they are to be truly regarded as one or five, takes up a more reasonable position” (jowett’s Trans., 3rd ed., 
iii. 475, 476). 

423 Cf. S. 1. H., 3: “Now as I chance myself to be as though initiate into the nature that transcendeth death, and that 
my feet have crossed the Plain of Truth”; and K. K., 22: “The Monarch came, and sitting on the Throne of Truth 
made answer to their prayers.” The locus classicus is, of course, Plato, Phadrus, 248 B. 

424 Cf. K K, 37: “’Tis they who, taught by Hermes that the things below have been disposed by God to be in 
sympathy with things above, established on the earth the sacred rites o’er which the mysteries in heaven preside.” 


- 97 - 



of Typhon and Osiris, and what I have quoted above falls naturally into place in the 
scheme of ideas of the tradition preserved in the treatise which we are discussing. 425 
It, indeed, pertains to a higher side of the matter, for it purports to be the highest 
theoria of all, and possible for the souls even of the most righteous only at long 
periods of time. 

Of course the representation is symbolical. The triangle is no triangle; it is the 
“plain of truth,” the “hearth of the universe.” The triangle, then, pertained to the 
plane of Fire proper and not Air. Still, the ordering of the “worlds” is similar to 
that of our soul spaces. The triangle is shut off from the manifested world by the 
TEon; it is out of space and time proper. Time flows down from it. The worlds 
proper are 3 worlds or cosmoi, each divided into 60 subordinate cosmoi, in choral 
dance, or orderly harmonious movement of one to the other. Our soul-spaces, 
then, may have been regarded as some reflection of these supernal conditions. 

One is almost tempted to turn the plane triangle into a solid figure, a tetrahedron 426 , 
and imagine the idea of a world or wheel, at each of the four angles, and to 
speculate on the Wheels of Ezekiel, the prototype of the Mercabah or Heavenly 
Chariot of Kabalism, the Throne of Truth of the Supreme, but I will not try the 
patience of my readers any further, for doubtless most of them will have cried 
already: Hold, enough! 

THE BOUNDARIES OF THE NUMBERS WHICH PRE-EXIST IN THE SOUL 

Perhaps, however, it would be as well, before dismissing the subject, to consider 
very briefly what Plato, following Pythagoras 427 , has to say concerning the 
“boundaries” of all numbers which pre-exist in the soul. These soul-numbers are 1, 
2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 27 (the combination of the two Pythagorean series 1, 2, 4, 8 and 1, 3, 9, 
27), or 1,2, 3, 2 2 , 2 3 , 3 2 , 3 3 . Of these numbers 1, 2, 3 are apportioned to the World- 
Soul itself, in its intellectual or spiritual aspect, and signify its abiding in (1), its 
proceeding from (2), and its returning to itself (3); this with regard to primary 
natures. But in addition, intermediate subtle natures or souls are “providentially” 
ordered in their evolution and involution, by the World-Soul; they proceed 
according to the power of the fourth term (4 or 2 2 ), “which possesses generative 
powers,” and return according to that of the fifth (9 or 3 2 ), “which reduces them to 
one.” Finally also solid or gross natures are also “providentially” ordered in their 
procession according to 8 (2 3 ), and in their conversion according to 27 (3 3 ). 428 

From all of which we get the following scheme of circular progression and 
conversion of the soul, the various main stages through which it passes: 


425 Our difficulty, however, is that Plutarch, in the words of one of his characters, rejects the idea of this numbering 
being in any way Egyptian, and ascribes it to a certain Petron of Himera in Sicily, — thereby suggesting a probable 
Pythagorean connection. 

426 See the section, “Some Outlines of iEonology,” F. F. F., pp. 311-335. 

427 See my Orpheus (London, 1896), pp. 255-262. 

428 Cf. Taylor (T.), “Introd. to Timasus,” Works of Plato (London, 1804), p. 442. 


- 98 - 



r 

2 1 



1 




With this compare the “Chaldasan Oracle” ( ap . Psellus, 19): “Do not soil the spirit, 
nor turn the plane into the solid” — jxrj Tivshpcc jxokuvr|q phis (3a0uvr|<; to Sninsdov 
(ed. Cory, Or. clii., p. 270); where the four stages correspond to the point, line, 
plane, and solid. It is also to be remembered that since x° = 1, 2° = 1 and 3° = 1. 

That these are the boundary numbers of the soul, according to Pythagoreo-Platonic 
tradition, is of interest, but how this can in any way be made to agree with the 
ordering of the soul-spaces in our treatise is a puzzle. That by adding these 
numbers together (1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 8 + 9 + 27) we get 54, and by farther adding 
the numbers of the World-Soul proper (1+2 + 3) we get 6, and so total out the 
whole sum of the phases to 60, savours somewhat of “fudging,” as we used to call 
it at school. It is by no means convincing, for we are here combining particulars 
with universals as though they were of equal dignity; still the ancients frequendy 
resort to such combinations. 

That, however, there is something more than learned trifling in these numbers of 
Plato may be seen by the brilliant study of Adam on the “nuptial number” of 
Plato 429 , which was based upon the properties of the “Pythagorean triangle,” a 
right-angled triangle to the containing sides of which the values of 3 and 4 were 
given, the value of its hypothenuse being consequently 5; and 3x4x5 = 60. The 
numbers 3, 4, 5, together with the series 1, 2, 4, 8, and 1, 3, 9, 27, were the 
numerical sequences which supplied those “canons of proportion” with which the 
Pythagoreans and Platonists chiefly busied themselves. 

Still, as far as I can see, this does not throw any clear light on the ordering of the 
soul spaces as given in our treatise, and we are therefore tempted to connect it with 
the tradition of the mysterious 60’s of Cleombrotus. But what that choral dance 
was which ordered the subordinate cosmoi into 60’s, and whether they proceeded 
by stages which might correspond to 3’s and 4’s and 5’s, we have, as far as I am 
aware, no data on which to base an argument. It may, however, have been 
connected with Babylonian ideas; the 3 may have been regarded as “falling into” 4, 
so making 12, and this stage in its turn have been regarded as “falling into” 5, and 
so making 60. 


429 Rep., viii. 545C-547A. See Adam (J.), The Nuptial Number oj Plato: Its Solution and Significance (London, 1891). 


- 99 - 



THE MYSTERIOUS CYLINDER 


It is to be noticed, however, that before the souls revolted, the Demiurge 
“appointed for them limits and reservations 4 ’" in the height of Upper Nature, that 
they might keep the cylinder a-whirl in proper order and economy” (11). 

They were, then, confined to certain orderings and spaces. But what is the 
mysterious “cylinder” which they were to keep revolving? 

So far I have come across nothing that throws any direct light on the subject. 
However, Proclus 4 ’ 1 says that Porphyry stated that among the Egyptians the letter 
y, surrounded by a circle, symbolized the mundane soul. 

It is curious that Porphyry should have referred this idea to the Egyptians, when he 
must have known that Plato, to whom Porphyry looked as the corypheus of all 
philosophy, had treated of the significance of the symbol X (in Greek y) in perhaps 
the most discussed passage of the Timms (36B). 4 ’ 2 This letter symbolized the 
mutual relation of the axes and equators of the sphere of the “same” (die “fixed 
stars”) and the sphere of the “other” (the “seven planetary spheres”). Porphyry, 
however, may have believed that Plato, or Pythagoras, got the idea in the first place 
from Egypt — the common persuasion of his school. 

This enigma of Plato is described as follows by Jowett in his Introduction to the 

Tima us: 433 

‘The universe revolves round a centre once in twenty-four hours, hut the 
orbits of the fixed stars take a different direction from that of the planets. 

The outer and the inner sphere cross one another and meet again at a point 
opposite to that of their first contact; the first moving in a circle from left to 
right along the side of a parallelogram which is supposed to be inscribed in 
it, the second also moving in a circle along the diagonal of the same 
parallelogram from right to left 34 ; or, in other ivords, the first describing the 
path of the equator, the second, the path of the ecliptic. ” 

We should thus, just as the Egyptians, according to Porphyry, symbolized it, 
represent the conception by the figure of a circle with two diameters suggesting 
respectively the equator and the ecliptic. 


43(1 Which may have been regarded as the prototypes of the soul-spaces. 

431 Comment, in Plat Tim., 216C; ed. C. E. C. Schneider (Vratislavia;, 1847), p. 250. 

432 A passage which Proclus, op. cit., 21 3A (ed. Sch., p. 152) further explains by means of the “harmonic canon” or 
ruler. 

433 Jowett (B.), Dialogues of Plato (3rd ed., Oxford, 1892), iii. 403. 

434 Cf. text 36C: “The motion of the same he carried round by the side to the right, and the motion of the diverse 
diagonally to the left,” — that is the side of the rectangular figure supposed to be inscribed in the circle of the “same,” 
and diagonally, across the rectangular figure from comer to corner; and 38D, 39A: “Now, when all the stars which 
were necessary to the creation of time [, i.e . the spheres of the sun, moon, and five planets] had attained a motion 
suitable to them, and had become living creatures, having bodies fastened by vital chains, and learned their appointed 
task, moving in the motion of the diverse, which is diagonal, and passes through, and is governed by the motion of 
the same, they revolved, some in a larger and some in a lesser orbit. . . . The motion of the same made them turn all 
in a spiral.” With these instruments of “time,” surrounded by the sphere of the same, compare the idea of time 
flowing down on the worlds, from the iEon, in the story of Cleombrotus. 


- 100 - 



But what is the rectangular figure to which Jowett refers, but which he does not 
further describe? The circles are spheres; and, therefore, the rectangular figure must 
be a solid figure inscribed in the sphere “of the same.” If we now set the circle 
revolving parallel to the longer sides of the figure, this “parallelogram” will trace 
out a cylinder, while the seven spheres of the “other,” the “souls” of the “planets,” 
moving parallel to one of the diagonals of our figure, and in an opposite direction 
to the sphere of the “same,” will, by their mutual difference of rates of motion, 
cause their “bodies” (die souls surrounding the bodies) to trace out spiral orbits. 

All this in itself, I confess, seems very far-fetched, and I should have thrown my 
notes on the subject into the waste-paper basket, but for the following 
consideration: Basil of Caesarea, in his Hexameron, or Homilies on the Six Days of 
Creation, declared it “a matter of no interest to us whether the earth is a sphere or a 
cylinder or a disk, or concave in the middle like a fan .” 411 

The cylinder-idea, then, was a favourite theory with regard to the earth-shape in the 
time of Basil, that is [in] the fourth century. 

This cylinder-idea, however, I am inclined to think was very ancient. In the domain 
of Greek speculation we first meet with it in what little is known of the system of 
Anaximander of Miletus, the successor of Thales. 

Anaximander is reported to have believed that “the earth is a heavenly body, 
controlled by no other power, and keeping its position because it is the same 
distance from all tilings; the form of it is curved, cylindrical, like a stone column; it 
has two faces; one of these is the ground beneath our feet, and the other is 
opposite to it .” 436 

And again: “That the earth is a cylinder in form, and that its depth is one-third of 
its breadth .” 41 

Now I have never been able to persuade myself that the earliest philosophers of 
Greece “invented” the ideas ascribed to them. They stood on the borderland of 
mythology and mysticism, and, in every probability, took their ideas from ancient 
traditions. Anaximander himself was in every probability indirectly, for all we know 
even directly, influenced by Egyptian and Chakkean notions; indeed, who can any 
longer doubt in the light of the Cnossus excavations ?” 438 

Anaximander is thus said to have regarded the earth-cylinder as fixed, whereas in 
our treatise the cylinder is not the earth and is not fixed; it is, on the contrary, a 
celestial cylinder and in constant motion. Can it, then, possibly be that this cylinder 
notion was associated with some Babylonian idea, and had its source in that 


435 So quoted in Andrew Dickson White’s History of the Warfare of Science ivith Theology in Christendom (New York, 1898), 
i. 92. Dr White, unfortunately, does not give the exact reference. The “fan” is, of course, the winnowing fan, a broad 
basket into which the corn mixed with chaff was received after threshing, and was then thrown up into the wind, so 
as to disperse the chaff and leave the grain. 

436 Alexander of Aphrodisias, Comment, on Aristotle in Meteor., 91r (vol. i., 268 I d); Diels, Doxographi Graci (Berlin, 
1879), p. 478. Cf. Aetius, De Placitis Reliquia, iii. 10 (Diels, 579). 

437 Plutarch, Strom., 2 (Diels, 579). See Fairbanks (A.), The First Philosophers of Greece (London, 1898), pp. 13, 14. 

438 Delitzsch also, in his Babel and Bibel, states that the great debt of early Greece to Assyria will be made clear in a 
forthcoming work of German scholarship. 


- 101 - 



country par excellence of cylinders? In Babylonia, moreover, the cylinder-shape was 
frequently used for seals, fashioned like a small roller, so that the characters or 
symbols engraved on them could be impressed on soft substance, such as wax. 
Further, the Babylonian and Egyptian civilizations were, as we know, closely 
associated, and pre-eminently so in the matter of sigils and seals. In the Coptic- 
Gnostic works, translated from Greek originals, and indubitably mainly of Egyptian 
origin, the idea of “characters,” “seals,” and “sigils,” as types impressed on matter, 
is a commonplace. 

Can our cylinder, then, have some connection with the circle of animal types, or 
types of life, of which so much is said in our treatise? The souls of the supernal 
man class would then have had the task of keeping this cylinder in motion, so that 
thereby the various types were continually impressed on the plasms in the sphere of 
generation, or ever-becoming — the wheel of genesis? 

This may be so, for in P. S. A., 19, we read: “The air, moreover, is the engine, or 
machine, through which all things are made . . . mortal from mortal things and 
things like these.” 

So also in K. K., 28, Hermes says: “And I will skillfully devise an instrument, 
mysterious, possessed of power of sight that cannot err . . . an instrument that 
binds together all that’s done.” 

Here again we have the same idea, all connected with the notion of Fate or 
Heimarmene; the instrument of Hermes is the Karmic Wheel, by which cause and 
effect are linked together, and that too with a moral purpose. 4 ’ 9 

Finally, in connection with our cylinder, we may compare the Aryan Hindu myth of 
the “Churning of the Ocean,” in the Vishnu Parana. The churning- staff or Pillar 
was the heaven-mountain, round which was coiled the cosmic serpent, to serve as 
rope for twirling it. The rope was held at either end by the Devas and Asuras, or 
gods and daemons. There is also a mystic symbol in India which probably connects 
with a similar range of ideas. It is two superimposed triangles (X), with their apices 
touching, and round the centre a serpent is twined, — a somewhat curious 
resemblance to our X and cylinder-idea. And so much for this puzzling symbol. 

THE EAGLE, LION, DRAGON AND DOLPHIN 

We now pass to the four leading types of animals, connected with souls of the 
highest rank — namely, the eagle, lion, dragon, and dolphin (24, 25) — which it may 
be of interest to compare with the symbolism of some of the degrees of the 
Mithriac Mysteries. 44 " In one of the preliminary degrees of the rite, we are 
informed, some of the mystas imitated the voices of birds, others the roaring of 
lions. 441 All of this was interpreted by the initiates as having reference to 


439 I have also got a stray reference, “xulavSgo?, Plut., 2, 682 C, Xylander’s pages,” but I have not been able to verify 
this. 

440 See Cumont (F.), Textes et Monuments figures nlat. aux Mjsteres de Mithra (Bruxelles, 1899), i. 315. 

441 Ps. Augustine, Quastt. Vet. etNov. Test. (Migne, P. V., tom, xxxiv. col. 2214 £). 


- 102 - 



transmigration or metempsychosis. Thus Porphyry 442 tells us that in the Mysteries 
of Mithras they called the my star by the names of different animals, so symbolizing 
man’s common lower nature with that of the irrational animals. Thus, for instance, 
they called some of the men “lions,” and some of the women “lionesses,” some 
were called “ravens,” while the “fathers,” the highest grade, were called “hawks” 
and “eagles.” The “ravens” were the lowest grade; those of the “lion” grade were 
apparently previously invested with the disguises and masks of a series of animal 
forms before they received the lion shape. 

Porphyry tells us, further, that Pallas, who had, prior to Porphyry’s day, written an 
excellent treatise on the Mithriaca, now unfortunately lost, asserts that all this was 
vulgarly believed to refer to the zodiac, but that in truth it symbolized a mystery of 
the human soul, which is invested with animal natures of various kinds 443 , 
according to the tradition of the Magi. Thus they call the sun (and therefore those 
corresponding to this nature) a bull, a lion, a dragon, and a hawk. 

It is further to be remembered that Appuleius 444 , in describing the robe with which 
he was invested after his initiation into the Mysteries of Isis, tells us that he was 
enthroned as the sun, robed in twelve sacramental stoles or garments; these 
garments were of linen with beautiful paintings upon them, so that from every side 
“you might see that I was remarkable by the animals which were painted round my 
vestment in various colours.” This dress, he says, was called the “Olympic Stole.” 

MOMUS 

Finally, it may perhaps be of service to make the reader a little better acquainted 
with Momus. 

Among the Greeks Momus was the personification of the spirit of fault-finding. 
Hesiod, in his Theogony (214), places him among the second generation of the 
children of Night, together with the Fates. From the Cypria * 45 of Stasimus 446 , we 
learn that, when Zeus, in answer to Earth’s prayer to relieve her of her 
overpopulation of impious mankind 447 , first sent the Theban War, and on this 
proving insufficient, bethought him of annihilating the human race by thunderbolts 
(fire) and floods (water), Momus advises the Father of gods and men to marry the 
goddess Thetis to a mortal, so that a beautiful daughter (Aphrodite-Helen) might 
be born to them, and so mankind, Greeks and Barbarians, on her account be 


442 De Abstinentia, iv. 16 (ed. Nauck, p. 253). 

443 Cf. Clement of Alexandria on the Basilidian theory of “appendages,” remembering that the School of Basilides 
was strongly tinctured with Egyptian ideas. “The Basilidians are accustomed to give the name of appendages (or 
accretions) to the passions. These essences, they say, have a certain substantial existence, and are attached to the 
rational soul, owing to a certain turmoil and primitive confusion. On to this nucleus other bastard and alien natures 
of the essence grow, such as those of the wolf, ape, lion, goat, etc. . . . And not only do human souls thus intimately 
associate themselves with the impulses and impressions of irrational animals, but they even initiate the movements 
and beauties of plants, because they likewise bear the characteristics of plants appended to them. Nay, there are also 
certain characteristics [of minerals] shown by habits, such as the hardness of adamant” (F. F. F, p. 276). 

444 Metamorphoses, Book xi. 

445 Which Pindar and Herodotus ascribed to Homer himself. 

446 See Frag. I. from the Scholion on Horn., II, i. 5 ff. 

447 See K K, 34. 


- 103 - 



involved in internecine strife — namely, the Trojan War. Further, the Scholiast on 
II., i. 5, avers that it was Momus whom Homer meant to represent by the “will” or 
“counsel” of Zeus. 

Sophocles, moreover, wrote a Satyric drama called “Momus,” 448 and so also 
Achasus. 449 

Both Plato 45 " and Aristotle 431 refer to Momus. Callimachus, the chief librarian of 
the Alexandrian Library, from 260-240 B.C., in his Mtia i 452 , pilloried his critic and 
former pupil Apollonius Rhodius as Momus. 

Momus, moreover, was a favourite figure with the Sophists and Rhetoricians, 
especially of die second century A.D. In 2E1. Aristides 453 , Momus, as he could find 
no fault with Aphrodite herself, found fault with her shoe 414 . Lucian makes 
Aphrodite vow to oppose Momus tooth and nail 455 , and makes Momus find fault 
with even the greatest works of the gods, such as the house of Athene, the bull of 
Zeus, and the men of Hephaestus, — the last because the god-smith had not put 
windows in their breasts so that their hearts might be seen 4 " 6 . 

And, interestingly enough in connection with our treatise, Lucian, in one of his 
witty sketches 457 , makes Momus one of the persons of the dialogue with Zeus and 
Hermes. Momus finds fault because Bacchus is reckoned among the gods, and is 
commanded by Zeus to refrain from making ridicule of Hercules and Asclepius. 

The popular figure of Momus was that of a feeble old man 438 , — a very different 
representation from the grandiose Intelligence of our treatise, a true Lucifer. 

Some representations give his one sharp tooth, and others wings. The story runs 
that Zeus finally banished him from Olympus for his fault-finding. 459 

The Onomastica Vaticana 460 connects Momus with Mammon; but this side-issue need 
not detain us 461 . 


THE MYSTIC GEOGRAPHY OF SACRED LANDS 

With regard to the symbolic figure of the Earth of §§ 46-48 of the second K. K. 
Extract, and the persuasion that Egypt was the heart or centre thereof, we may 


448 Frag. 369-374B (ed. Dind.); the context of which some believe to be found in Lucian’s Hermotimus, 20. 

449 Frag. 29, from the Scholion on Aristophanes, Pax, 357. 

450 Rep., vi. 487A: “Nor would even Momus find fault with this.” 

451 De Partt. Animal., iii. 2. 

452 And also at the end of his Hymn to Apollo, ii. 112; also Epigram. Frag., 70. 

453 Or., 49; ed. Jebb, p. 497. 

454 Of- Julian, Ep. ad Dionjs. 

455 Dial. Deor., xx. 2. 

456 Hermot., xx.; cf. Nig., xxxii.; Dial. Deor., ix.; Ver. Hist., ii. 3; Bab. Fab., lix.; and ]np. Frag., xxii. 

457 Deor. Consil, iv. 

458 Philostratus, Ep. 21. 

459 For the above and other references, see Trumpets art. “Momus,” in Roscher’s Lexicon. 

460 Lug., 194, 59. 

461 See Nestle’s art. “Mammon,” in Cheyne’s Encyclopcedia Biblica. 


- 104 - 



append two quotations on the subject from widely different standpoints. The first 
is from Dr Andrew D. White’s recent volumes : 462 

“Every great people of antiquity, as a rule, regarded its own central city or most 
holy place as necessarily the centre of the earth. 

‘The Chaldeans held that their ‘ holy house of the gods’ was the centre. The 
Egyptians sketched the world under the form of a human figure, in which 
Egypt was the heart, and the centre of it Thebes. For the Assyrians, it was 
Babylon; for the Hindus, it was Mount Mem; for the Greeks, so far as the 
civilised world was concerned, Olympus or the temple of Delphi; for the 
modern Mohammedans, it is Mecca and its sacred stone; the Chinese, to 
this day, speak of their empire as the ‘ middle kingdom. ’ It was in 
accordance, then, with a simple tendency of human thought that the Jews 
believed the centre of the world to be Jerusalem. 

‘The book of Ezekiel speaks of Jerusalem as in the middle of the earth, 
and all other parts of the world as set around the holy city. Throughout the 
‘ages of faith ’ this was very generally accepted as a direct revelation from the 
Almighty regarding the earth’s form. St Jerome, the greatest authority of the 
early Church upon the Bible, declared, on the strength of this utterance of 
the prophet, that Jerusalem could be nowhere but at the earth ’s centre; in 
the ninth century Archbishop Kabanus Maurus reiterated the same 
argument; in the eleventh century Hugh of St Victor gave to the doctrine 
another scriptural demonstration; and Pope Urban, in his great sermon at 
Clermont urging the Franks to the crusade, declared, Jerusalem is the 
middle point of the earth’; in the thirteenth century an ecclesiastical writer 
much in vogue, the monk Casarius of Heisterbach, declared, As the heart 
in the midst of the body, so is Jerusalem situated in the midst of our 
inhabited earth, ’ — ‘so it was that Christ was crucified at the centre of the 
earth. ’ Dante accepted this view of Jerusalem as a certainty, wedding it to 
immortal verse; and in the pious book of travels ascribed to Sir John 
Mandeville, so widely read in the Middle Ages, it is declared that 
Jerusalem is at the centre of the world, and that a spear standing erect at 
the Holy Sepulchre casts no shadow at the equinox. 

‘Ezekiel’s statement thus became the standard of orthodoxy to early map- 
makers. The map of the world at Hereford Cathedral, the maps of Andrea 
Bianco, Marino Sanuto, and a multitude of others fixed this view in men’s 
minds, and doubtless discouraged during many generations any scientific 


462 Op. supra at, i. 98, 99. 


- 105 - 



statements tending to unbalance this geographical centre revealed in 
Scripture. ” 

So much for the righteous indignation of modern physical science; now for 
cryptology and mysticism. M. W. Blackden, in a recent article on “The Mysteries 
and the ‘Book of the Dead,”’ writes as follows : 463 

“One other key there is . . . without which it is useless to approach The 
Took of the Dead with the idea of discussing any of those gems of wisdom 
for which old Egypt was so famous. . . . The knowledge of its existence is 
no recent discovery: it is simply that ancient nations such as the Egyptians, 
Chaldees, and Jews, had a system of symbolic geography. . . . 

‘The Jewish and Egyptian priestly caste endeavoured to map out their 
lands in accordance with their symbols of spiritual things, so far as the 
physical features would permit. This symbolism of mountain, city, plain, 
desert, and river extended from the various parts and furniture of the 
Eodge, to use Masonic phraseology, up to the spiritual anatomy, as it were, 
of both macrocosm and microcosm. 

‘Thus in the Jewish Scriptures it is not difficult to distinguish, in the 
prophetic battles of the nations that were to rage round about Jerusalem, the 
same symbolism as we have more directly expressed in a little old book 
called The Siege of Mansoul, the author of which was the John Tuny an of 
The Pilgrim’s Progress, a man who could well grasp the excellence of 
geographical symbolism. 

“I cannot, of course, here enter at length into the geographical symbols of 
Egypt, it would take too long; but as I have given Jerusalem as a symbol, I 
may say further that Jerusalem as a symbol corresponds to the Egyptian 
On, or Heliopolis, and so astronomically to the centre of the world and of 
the universe, and in the microcosm to the spiritual Heart of Man . 464 

“Tut there is one difference between the Hebrew and Egyptian city; for 
whereas the actual Jerusalem corresponds among the Hebrew prophets to 
that Jerusalem that now is, and is in bondage with her children, Heliopolis 
corresponded among the Egyptian priesthood to that city which was to come, 
the Heavenly City, the New Heart, that should be given to redeemed 
mankind. ” 


463 The TheosophicalSSevieiv (July, 1902), vol. xxx. pp. 406, 407. 

464 “There is an old map of the world in the British Museum which demonstrates both these significations. See also 
Mappa Mundi, ‘Ebsdorf,’ 1284, and that in Hereford Cathedral made by Richard of Haldingham, one of the 
Prebends, 1290-1310.” 


- 106 - 



Here then we have a thesis that deserves a volume to itself; and so I leave it to him 
who has a mind to undertake the labour. 

EXCERPT XXVII. 

FROM THE SERMON OF ISIS TO HORUS 

(Patrizzi (p. 34b) runs this on to the last without a break. 

Text: Stob., Phys., xli. 68, 69, under heading, “Of Hermes: A Sermon of Isis to 
Homs”; G. pp. 476-481; M. i. 342-352; W. i. 458-472. 

Menard: Livre III., No. iii. of “Fragments,” etc., as above, pp. 209-221.) 

1 . 465 IN wondrous fashion — ( Horns said) — hast thou explained to me, 
most mighty mother Isis, the details of God’s wondrous soul-making, and I 
remain in wonder; but not as yet hast thou told me whereto the souls ivhen 
freed from body go. I would then thank thee for being made initiate by word 
of mouth 466 into this vision of the souf 67 , O only mother, deathless one ! 

2. And Isis said: 

Give ear, my son; most indispensable is this research. That which doth hold 
together, doth also have a place which doth not disappear. For this is what 
my sermon will set forth. 

O wondrous, mighty son of mighty sire Osiris, [the souls] when they go 
forth from bodies, are not confusedly and in a rush dissolved into the air, 
and scattered in the rest of boundless Breath, so that they cannot any more 
as the same [souls] return again to bodies; nor is it possible, again, to turn 
them back unto that place from which they came at first — no more than 
water taken from the bottom of a jar can be pourecf 68 [back again] into 
the self-same place whence it was taken; nor does the same when taken take 
a place peculiar to it, but is mixed up with the whole mass of water. 469 Not 
thus is it [with souls], high-minded Homs! 

3. Now as I chance myself to be as though initiate into the nature which 
transcendeth death, and that my feet have crossed the Plain of Truth, I will 
explain to thee in detail how it is; and preface this by telling thee that water 
is a body void of reason condensed from many compound things into a fluid 
mass, whereas the soul’s a thing of individual nature, son, and of a royal 


465 1 have numbered the paragraphs for convenience of reference. 

466 puCTTt]?. The mystes, speaking generally, was initiated by word of mouth, the epoptes by sight or vision. 

467 Oswgia. 

468 Reading etu^siv for etis^siv. 

469 The constmction of the whole of the above paragraph is exceedingly involved. 


- 107 - 



kind, a work of God's [own] hands and mind \ and of itself led by itself to 
mind. 

What then doth come from “one” and not from “other, ” cannot be mingled 
with a different thing; wherefore it needs must be that the soul’s congress 
with the body is a concord wrought by God’s necessity. 

But that they are not [all] confusedly and [all] at random and by chance 
sent up again to one and the same place, but each to its own proper region, 
is clear from what [the soul] doth suffer while still it is in body and in 
plasm, when it has been made dense against its proper nature. 

Now give good heed to the similitude recounted, Homs well-beloved! 

4. Suppose in one and the same cage have been shut up both men and 
eagles, doves and swans, and swallows, hawks and sparrows, flies, and 
snakes, and lions, leopards, wolves, and dogs, and hares, and kine and 
sheep, and some amphibious animals, as seals and others, tortoises and our 
own crocodiles; then, that, my son, at one [and the same] moment they are 
[all] let out. 

They [all] will turn instinctively — man to his gathering spots and roofs; the 
eagle to the ether, in which its nature is to spend its life; the doves into the 
neighbouring air; the hawks [to that] above [the doves]; the swallows where 
men dwell; the sparrows round the fruit-trees; the swans where they may 
sing ; the flies about the earth, [but only] so far from it as they can with [- 
out their losing] smell of man for that the fly, my son, is fond of man 
especially and tends to earth); the lions and the leopards towards the hills; 
the wolves towards desert spots; the dogs after men’s tracks; the kine to 
stalls and fields; the sheep to pastures; the snakes to earth’s recesses; the 
seals and tortoises, with [all] their kind, unto the deeps and streams, so 
that they neither should be robbed of the dry land nor taken from their 
cognate water — each one returning to its proper place by means of its 
internal means of judgment. 

So every soul, both in a human form and otherwise incarnate on the earth, 
knoivs inhere it has to go, — unless some foolish person 470 come and say, my 
son, that it is possible a bull should live in water and a tortoise up in air! 

5. Hnd if this be the case when they are plunged in flesh and blood — that 
they do nothing contrary to what’s appointed them, e’en though they are 
being punished for being put in body is a punishment for them) — how 


470 xi? xcov xucpwviwv — an interesting phrase as showing that Typhon was regarded as the enemy of Osiris (the Logos 
or Reason). 


- 108 - 



much the more [is it the case] ivhen they possess their proper liberty [ and 
are set free] from punishment and beingplunged [in body]? 

Now the most holy ordering of souls is on this wise. Turn thou thy gage 
above, most noble-natured son, upon their orders. The space from height of 
heaven to the moon devotes itself unto the gods and stars and to the rest of 
providence; the space, my son, from moon to us is dwelling place of souls. 

This so great air, however, has in it a belt to which it is our use to give the 
name of wind, a definite expanse in which it is kept moving to refresh the 
things on earth, and which I will hereafter tell about. 

Yet in no manner by its motion on itself does it become an obstacle to souls; 
for though it keeps on moving souls can dart up or dart down 471 , just as 
the case may be, free from all let and hindrance. Tor they pass through 
without immixture or adhesion as water flows through oil, 

6. Now of this interval. Horns, my son, there are four main divisions and 
sixty special spaces. 

Of these [divisions] the first one upwards from the earth is of four spaces, so 
that the earth in certain of its mountain heights and peaks extends and 
comes so far, but beyond these it cannot in its nature go in height. 

The second after this is of eight spaces, in which the motions of the winds 
take place. 

Give heed, O son, for thou art hearing mysteries that must not be 
disclosed — of earth and heaven and all the holy air which lies between, in 
which there is the motion of the wind and flight of birds. For above this the 
air doth have no motion and sustains no life. 

This [moving] air moreover hath of its own nature this authority — that it 
can circulate in its own spaces and also in the four of earth with all the lives 
which it contains, while earth cannot ascend into its [realm]. 

The third consists of sixteen spaces filled with subtle air and pure. 

The fourth consists of two and thirty [spaces], in which there is the subtlest 
and the finest air; it is by means of this that [air] shuts from itself the 
heavens above which are by nature fiery. 

7 . This ordering is up and down in a straight line and has no overlapping 
so that there are four main divisions, twelve intervallic ones and sixty 
spaces. 


471 Cf. the beginning of the Apocalypse of Thespesius (Arkteus) in Plutarch, De Sera Num. Vind., xxii. 


- 109 - 



And in these sixty spaces dwell the souls , each one according to its nature, 
for though they are of one and the same substance, they ’re not of the same 
dignity. For by so much as any space is higher from the earth than any 
other, by so much do the souls in them, my son, surpass in eminence the one 
the other. 472 

What souls, however, go to each of them, I will accordingly begin again to 
tell thee, Horns, [son] of great renown, taking their order from above down 
to the earth. 

CONCERNING THE INBREATHING AND THE TRANSMIGRATION OF THE 

SOUL 473 

8. The [air] between the earth and heavens, Horns, is spaced out by 
measure and by harmony. 

These spaces have been named by some of our forefathers pones, by others 
firmaments, by others layers. 

And in them dwell both souls which have been set free from their bodies, 
and also those which have as yet been never shut in body. 

A nd each of them, my son, hath just the place it doth deserve; so that the 
godly and the kingly ones dwell in the highest space of all, those least in 
honour and the rest of the decadent ones [dwell] in the lowest space of all, 
while middling souls dwell in the middle space. 

Accordingly, those souls which are sent down to rule, are sent down, Horns, 
from the upper pones; and when they are set free [again] they go back to the 
same or even still more lofty ones, unless it be they still have acted contrary 
to their own nature’s dignity and the pronouncement of the Haw of God. 

Such souls as these the Providence above, according to the measure of their 
sins, doth banish down to lower spaces; just as with those which are inferior 
in dignity and power ; it leads them up from lower [realms] to vaster and 
more lofty ones. 

9. For up above [them all] there are two ministers of universal Providence, 
of whom one is the warder of the souls, the other their conductor. The 
warder [watches o’er the souls when out of body], while the conductor is 
dispatcher and distributor of souls into their bodies. The former keeps them, 
while the latter sends them forth according to the Will of God. 


472 For a consideration of this ordering, see p. 168 ff. above. 

473 This appears to be a heading inserted by Stobteus ( Phjs ., xli. 64) or some scribe; there seems to be no break in the 
text. 


- 110 - 



For this cause (logos) then , my son , nature on earth according to the change 
of deeds above doth model out the vessels and shape out the tents in which 
the souls are cast. 474 Two energies, experience and memory, assist her. 

And this is memory’s task, [to see] that nature guards the type of every 
thing sent down out of its source and keeps its mixture as it is above; while 
of experience [the work is this, to see] conformably to every one of the 
descending souls it may have its embodiment, and that the plasms may be 
made effective 47 — that for the swift ones of the souls the bodies also may be 
swift, for slow ones slow, for active active ones, for sluggish sluggish ones, for 
powerful powerful, and for crafty crafty ones, and in a word for every one of 
them as it is fit. 

1 0. For not without intention hath she clad winged things with plumage; 
and tricked out with senses more than ordinary and more exact those which 
have reason; and some of the four-footed things made strong with horns, 
some strong with teeth, some strong with claws and hoofs; while creeping 
things she hath made supple with bodies clad in easy-moving scales, which 
easily can glide away. 

And that the watery nature of their body may not remain entirely weak , 
she doth provide the sharpened fangs of some of them with power; so that by 
reason of the fear of death [they cause] they’re stronger than the rest. 

The swimming things being timorous, she gives to dwell within an element 
inhere light can exercise nor one nor other of its powers, for fire in water 
gives nor light nor heat. But each of them, swimming in water clad in scales 
or spines, flees from what frightens it where’er it will, using the water as a 
means of hiding it from sight. 

1 1 . For souls are shut in each class of these bodies according to their 
similarity [to them]. Those which have power of judgment go down into 
men; and those that lack it into quadrupeds, whose [only] law is force; the 
crafty ones [go] into reptiles, for none of them attack a man in front, but lie 
in wait and strike him down; and into swimming things the timid ones or 
those which are not worthy to enjoy the other elements. In every class, 
however, there are found some which no longer use their proper nature. 

Flow [meanest thou] again, my mother ? Homs said. 

And Isis answered: 


474 The text is exceedingly imperfect, and in its present state quite untranslatable. 

475 The text is again very imperfect. 


- Ill - 



A man , for instance ; son , o’ersteps his power of judgment; a quadruped 
avoids the use of force; and reptiles lose their craftiness; and birds their fear 
of men. So much [then] for the ordering of [souls] above and their descent, 
and for the making of their bodies. 

12. In every class and kind of the above, my son, there may be found some 
regal souls; others also descend with various natures, souse fiery, and some 
cold, some overbearing and some mild, souse skilled, souse unskilled, some 
idle, some industrious, sossse one thing souse another. And this results frosss 
the arrangement of the regions whence the souls leap down to their 
embodiment. 

For frosss the regal gone they leap down [into birth], the soul of the like 
nature ruling them 476 ; for there are sssany sovereignties. Sossse are of souls, 
and sossse of bodies, and sossse of arts, and sossse of sciences, and sossse are of 
ourselves. 

How [ meanest thou] again, my sss other, “of ourselves”? 

For instance, son, it is thy sire Osiris who is [the ruler] of the souls of them 
born after us up to this time 477 ; whereas the prince of every race [is ruler] of 
their bodies; [ the king ] of counsel is the father and the guide of all, Thrice- 
greatest Herssses; of snedicine Asclepius, Hephaestus’ son; of power and 
sssight again Osiris, and after him thyself, my son; and of philosophy 
Arnebeschenis; of poetry again Asclepius-Imuth. 

13. For generally, my son, thou’ It find, if thou inquirest, that there are 
many ruling many things and many holding sway o ’er many. And he who 
rules them all, my son, is from the highest space; while he who rules souse 
part of them, doth have the rank of that particular realm from which he is. 

Those who come from the regal gone, [have] a more ruling [part to play; 
those from the gone of fire 478 ] become fire-workers and fire-tenders; those 
from the watery one live out their life in waters; those from the [gone] of 
science and of art are occupied with arts and sciences; those from the [gone] 
of inactivity inactively and heedlessly live out their lives. 

For that the sources of all things wrought on the earth by word or deed, are 
up above, and they dispense for us their essences by weight and measure; 
and there is naught which hath not come down from above, and will return 
again to re-descend. 


476 The text is here very corrupt, and the reading of the last words of the two following sentences very doubtful. 

477 That is presumably since the time when Osiris and Isis lived on earth among men. 

478 The text is exceedingly defective. 


- 112 - 



14. What dost thou mean again by this, my mother ? Tell mel 

And Isis once again did make reply: Most holy Nature hath set in living 
creatures the clear sign of this return. For that this breath which we breathe 
from above out of the air ; we send out up again , to take it in [ once more]. 

And we have in us organs, son, to do this work, and when they close their 
mouths whereby the breath ’s received, then we no longer are as now we are, 
but we depart. 

Moreover, son of high renown, there are some other things which we have 
added to us outside the weighed-out mixture [of the body]. 

15. What, then (said Horns j, is this mixture, mother ? 

It is a union and a blend of the four elements; and from this blend and 
union a certain vapour 479 rises, which is enveloped by the soul, but 
circulates within the body, sharing with each, with body and with soul, its 
nature. And thus the differences of changes are effected both in soul and 
body. 

For if there be in the corporeal make-up more of fire, thereon the soul, 
which is by nature hot, taking unto itself another thing that’s hot, and [so] 
being made more fiery, makes the life more energetic and more passionate, 
and the body quick and active. 

If [there be] more of air, thereon the life becomes both light and springy and 
unsteady both in the soul and body. 

And if there’s more of water, then the creature also doth become of supple 
soul and easy disposition, and ready of embrace, and able easily to meet and 
join with others, through water’s power of union and communion with the 
rest of things; for that it finds a place in all, and when it is abundant, doth 
dissolve what it surrounds, while if [there’s] little [of it], it sinks into and 
doth become what it is mingled with. As for their bodies, by dampness and 
by sponginess they are not made compact, but by a slight attack of sickness 
are dissolved, and fall away by little and by little from the bond which holds 
them severally together. 

And if the earthy [element] is in excess, the creature’s soul is dull, for it 
has not its body-texture loosely knit, or space for it to leap through, the 
organs of sensation being dense; but by itself it stays within, bound down by 
weight and density. As for its body, it is firm, but heavy and inert, and 
only moved of choice by [exercise of] strength. 


479 Cf. 17 and 20 below. 


- 113 - 



But if there is a balanced state of all [the elements], then is the animal 
made hot for doing, light for moving well-mixed for contact, and excellent 
for holding things together. 480 

16. Accordingly those which have more in them of fire and air, these are 
made into birds, and have their state above hard by those elements from 
which they came. 

While those which have more fire, less air, and earth and water equal, these 
are made into men, and for the creature the excess of heat is turned into 
sagacity; for that the mind in us is a hot thing which knows not how to 
burn, but has intelligence to penetrate all things. 

And those which have in them more water and more earth, but moderate 
air and little fire, these are turned into quadrupeds, and those which have 
more heat are stronger than the rest. Those which have equal earth and 
water, are made into reptiles. These through their lack of fire lack courage 
and straigh forwardness; while through their having water in them they are 
cold; and through their having earth they heavy are and torpid; yet through 
their having air, they can move easily if they should choose to do so. 

Those which have in them more of wet, and less of dry, these are made into 
fish. These through their lack of heat and air are timorous and try to hide 
themselves, and through excess of wet and earthy elements, they find their 
home, through their affinity, in fluid earth and water. 

17. It is according to the share [ they have] in every element and to the 
compass of that share, that bodies reach full growth [in man]; according to 
the smallness of their share the other animals have been proportioned — 
according to the energy which is in every element, 481 

Moreover, O my well-beloved, I say, that when, out of this state [of things], 
the blend based on the first commixture [of the elements in any case], and 
the resultant vapour 482 from it, so far preserve their own peculiarity, that 
neither the hot part takes on another heat, nor [does] the aery [take] 
another air, nor [does] the watery part another wetness, nor [yet] the earthy 
[take] another density, then doth the animal remain in health. 

1 8. But if they do not, son, remain in the proportions which they had from 
the beginning, but are too much increased — (I do not mean in energy 
according to their compass or in the change of sex and body brought about 

480 The text is faulty, the language artificial, the analogy strained, and the sense accordingly obscure. Meineke reads: 
■ysvvcdov 8 e si? 0f]?iv. 

481 The text is utterly corrupt and has not yet been even plausibly emended. 

482 Cf. 15 and 20. 


- 114 - 



by growth, but in the blend, as ive have said before, of the component 
elements, so that the hot, for instance, is increased too much or too much 
lessened, and so for all the rest) — then will the animal be sick. 

19. And if this [increase] doth take place in both the elements of heat and 
air, the soul’s tent fellows, then doth the creature fall into symbolic dreams 
and ecstasies; for that a concentration of the elements whereby the bodies are 
dissolved has taken place. For ’tis the earthy element itself which is the 
condensation of the body ; the watery element in it as well is a fluidity to 
make it dense. Whereas the aery element is that in us which has the power 
of motion, and fire is that which makes an end of all of them. 

20. Just then as is the vapour 483 which ariseth from the first conjunction 
and co-blending of the elements, as though it were a kindling or an 
exhalation, — whatever it may be, it mingles with the soul and draws it to 
itself, so that it shares its nature good or bad. And if the soul remains in 
its original relationship and common life with it, it keeps its rank. 

But when there’s added from without some larger share than what was first 
laid down for it, — either to the whole mixture, or to its parts, or to one 
part of it, — then the resulting change effected in the vapour doth bring 
about a change or in the disposition of the soul or of the body. 

The fire and air, as tending upward, hasten upward to the soul, which 
dwells in the same regions as themselves; the watery and the earthy 
elements, as tending down, sink down upon the body, which doth possess 
the selfsame seat. 

COMMENTARY 

ARGUMENT 

The Sermon from which this Extract is taken plainly belonged to the same class of 
literature as the K K. Excerpts. The writer is an initiate of a higher degree, 
imparting instruction to his pupil by word of mouth. 

He himself, however, professes to have “seen,” for he has been plunged in the Cup 
of Immortality, and his feet have crossed the Plain of Truth (3). 

1. The subject is the excarnate state of souls (1-3). The instruction is given by an 
analogy and a similitude (4). Each soul seeks naturally its proper habitat in the 
unseen world. 

5. The ordering of the spaces of the excarnate souls is then described. These spaces 
are all in the “great air,” the sublunary region, extending from the earth surface to 
the moon. 


483 Cf. 15 and 17. 


- 115 - 



6. Of this great interval there are 4 main divisions and 60 spaces, the divisions 
consisting respectively of 4, 8, 16 and 32 sub-spaces. Above the second division 
from below there is no motion of the “air”; the “wind,” or “moving air” belt, 
belongs properly to this second division, but has also authority over the first or 
lowest division, which extends from the earth-surface to the tops of the highest 
mountains. 

7. Besides these 4 divisions and 60 spaces, there is a further ordering into 12 
“intervallic” divisions. 484 

8. All is arranged by measure and harmony, and after death every soul goes to the 
space of its desert, ascending and descending according to an unerring law of 
Providence. 

9. To carry out this economy there are two ministers of Providence, the warder and 
the conductor of souls. The one watches over souls who are out of body, and the 
other brings them back to suitable bodies. These bodies are made by nature in 
exact correspondence with their former deeds and characters; in this nature is aided 
by the energies of experience and memory (9-1 1). 

12. The nature of the soul is conditioned by its habitat in the air-spaces or zones; 
and this is especially the case with those of the regal type. The names of some of 
these royal souls and their offices are given. 

1 3. In brief all is ordered from above; the source of all is above in the soul-spaces, 
and as all souls come thence, so will all return thither. 

1 4. How this is effected is explained as being conditioned by a certain link between 
soul and body, a sort of quintessence, or exhalation, or vapour, of the blend of sub- 
elements which compose the body (14-20). 485 It is a sort of etheric link between 
soul and body; it circulates in the body, but also shares with the soul, which is not 
thought of as being in the body, but as a sphere enveloping the body; or at any rate 
the body is in the soul, and not the soul in the body. Health is said to depend upon 
the maintenance of the due proportion of the “vapours” 486 of this “etheric double” 
(18). 

Not only so, but the increase of vitality or intensity in these elements in the 
“vapour,” is the means of remembering symbolic dreams and passing into a state of 
ecstasy; finally it is the fiery element of this “vapour” which dissolves this 
“spirituous body” (19). 

It is by means of this link that changes are effected from soul to body, and from 
body to soul (20); and here, unfortunately, Stobasus ends his excerpt. 


484 See Comments on K. K, 10. 

485 This bears a curious resemblance to the prdnamaya kosha, or “vital sheath,” of the Vedantins. 

486 Vedantic prana’s, of which there are five. 


- 116 - 



TITLE AND ORDERING 


The “Sermon of Isis to Homs” extract is, in both style and context, so similar to 
the K. K. excerpts that we might almost take it to be part and parcel of the very 
same treatise; but if this had been the case, Stobasus, following his custom, would 
have presumably headed it with a simple “from the same.” He may, however, have 
made a mistake, for that the good Joannes sometimes nods, may be seen from the 
short Excerpt xxi., which he says is also taken from “The [Sermon] of Isis to 
Horns” 4 * but this cannot be the case, since Isis is here addressing a certain king as 
her pupil, and not Horns. 

Moreover, at the very beginning of our excerpt Horns distinctly states that Isis has 
already explained to him “the details of God’s wondrous soul-making,” and thanks 
her “for being made initiate by word of mouth into the vision of the soul,” — all of 
which is a precise reference to the contents of the K K. excerpts. I am, therefore, 
inclined to think that not only is it a further tractate of instruction following 
immediately on K. K., but that even if it were supposed to be part and parcel of the 
same sermon, and that “The [Sermon] of Isis to Horns” was simply a sub-title or 
alternative title of the “Virgin of the World,” the hypothesis could not be easily set 
aside. 488 

In any case it is quite certain that S. I. H. belongs to precisely the same type as K. 
K.; and that it pertains to the same special class of Trismegistic literature, and to a 
somewhat similar type as the treatise from which Cyril quotes Fragg. xix., xx., xxi., 
in which Osiris figures as the disciple of the Good Daimon, Trismegistus. 

THE BOOKS OF ISIS AND HORUS 

Here also, as in K K., Isis comes forward as “initiated into the nature that 
transcendeth death,” her “feet have crossed the Plain of Truth” (3) that is as we 
have shown in the Comments on K. K., 10, the writer claims to have reached the 
degree of illumination which bestows on men the consciousness of the gods. “Isis,” 
then, is not “common to all priests,” as Jamblichus says of “Hermes,” without the 
honorific qualification “Thrice-greatest,” but rather of a certain grade of initiation; 
the teacher of that lower grade, or Horus-grade, being Hermes’ representative. Isis 
was commonly regarded as the Lady of all wisdom and teacher of all magic. 
Already in the earliest Hellenistic period she had attributes similar to those of 
Thoth-Hermes, and thus comes forward as the Orderer of the world 489 ; and not 
only so, but, like Thoth, she is called Lady of the heart and of the tongue; that is to 
say, her attributes were those of the Logos. 490 


487 Of which Schow gives the alternative heading: “From the Intercession (or Supplication) of Isis,” which Gaisford 
(in a note) thinks is from the Vienna Codex. This, however, is not the case, for the Vindobonensis preserves the 
usual reading except that the last word is missing. See R. 134, n. 3. 

488 R. (p. 135, n. 3), however, thinks this impossible. 

489 See Reitzenstein, Zmi religionsgesch. Fragen, 104 ff. 

49,1 Plutarch, De Is. et Os., lxviii.: “They say that of the trees in Egypt the persea is especially dedicated to her, and that 
its fruit resembles a heart, and its leaf a tongue. For nothing that men have is more divine than the word {logos), and 
especially the [word] concerning the gods.” The fruit of the persea grew from the stem. 


- 117 - 



That there was a secret theosophic and apocalyptic literature ascribed to Isis and 
Horns may be seen from Lucian, who, in one of his humorous sketches, puts into 
the mouth of Pythagoras the following sentence: 

“I also journeyed to Egypt that I might make the acquaintance of the 
prophets of wisdom, and I descended into the shrines of the temples and 
learned the Books of Isis and Homs. ” 491 

Here again, then, as Manetho tells us, these Books, as the Books of Hermes, were 
kept secret in the holy of holies of the Temples; and these shrines were evidendy 
underground for Pythagoras is said to have “descended” to them. 

This is the Horns who is not only, after Osiris, the lord of power and might, that is, 
king, but lord of philosophy, as Arnebeschenis (12). For Arnebeschenis, that is 
Har-nebeschenis, is, as Spiegelberg has shown 492 , an Egyptian proper name, 
meaning “Horns lord of Letopolis,” at one time an important city in the Delta. In 
the Alchemical literature also we meet with Horns as a writer of books, as for 
instance in the superscription “Horns the Gold-miner to Cronus who is 
Ammon.” 493 

Here we see that Horns stands to Isis as Asclepius to Hermes; Asclepius wrote 
books to Ammon, and so Horns wrote books to Ammon; but whereas the 
Trismegistic tradition proper looked back to Cronus (Ammon) as one of its earliest 
teachers, the later writings converted Ammon into a king who was taught by 
Asclepius or by Horns. 

THE WATERY SPHERE AND SUBTLE BODY 

The writer of S. I. H. tells us that the soul in its royal state, that is while lord of 
itself, is a divine creature, but in incarnation it is united with the watery plasm or 
subtle body, of K K., 18, where Hermes says that in making it he “used more water 
than was required”; and to which the soul in its complaint (§ 21) refers as a “watery 
sphere.” This union makes it dense “against its proper nature” (3), and it is further 
densified by a certain “vaporous” nature which unites it with the physical frame 
(15, 17, 20); concerning all of which it is of interest to refer to Philoponus, who 
tells us that: 

“They [the ancients] further add, that there is something of a plant al and 
plastic life 494 also, exercised by the soul, in those spirituous and airy bodies 
after death; they being nourished too, though not after the same manner, as 
these gross earthly bodies of ours are here, but by vapours; and that not by 
parts or organs, but throughout the whole of them (as sponges) 495 , they 
imbibing everywhere those vapours. Tor which cause, they who are wise will 


491 G alius, 18. 

492 Demotische Studien, i., “Agyptische u. griechische Eigennamen,” p. 28 (cf. also p. 41); R. 135. 

493 Berthelot, p. 103. 

494 xrjg cpiraxfp — that is, vegetative. 

495 Endosmosis and exosmosis. 


- 118 - 



in this life also take care of using a thinner and dryer diet ) that so that 
spirituous body (which we have also at this present time within our grosser 
body) may not be clogged and incras sated, but attenuated. Over and above 
which these ancients made use of catharms, o r purgations, to the same end 
and purpose also: for as this earthly body is washed with water, so is that 
spirituous body cleansed by cathartic vapours; some of these vapours being 
nutritive, others purgative. Moreover, these ancients further declared 
concerning this spirituous body, that it was not organised, but did the whole 
of it, in every part throughout, exercise all functions of sense, the soul 
hearing and seeing, and perceivng all sensibles, by it everywhere. ” 496 

THE HABITAT OF EXCARNATE SOULS 

But to return to our treatise; the dwelling-place of excarnate souls is the Air, the 
sublunary region of four main layers, which are successively subtler and finer as 
they are more removed from the earth; the uppermost limit of the Air is 
coterminous with the fiery or setheric realms (6), the habitat of the gods. 

In the different zones, or firmaments, or layers of this Air, dwell not only excarnate 
souls, during the period between their incarnations, but also those which have 
never yet been shut in body — that is, presumably, the daimones (8). 

With regard to the manner in which souls are kept in their appropriate spaces after 
the death of the body, and the way in which they are brought back to appropriate 
bodies, and the two ministers of Providence (9), it is of value to note that in this we 
have a simple outline of what is explained at great length and in much detail in the 
Coptic Gnostic work called Pistis Sophia. It would, however, occupy too much space 
here to deal with the representations of the Egyptian Gnostic work on this subject 
in a satisfactory manner, and as the text is now accessible in English, it can easily be 
consulted by the reader. 497 


496 Philoponus, Proam. in Aristot. deAnima, as given in Cudworth’s Intellectual System (ed. 1820), iii. 506 ff.; see my 
Orpheus, pp. 278, 279. 

497 For Melchizedek, the “Receiver of light and Guide of souls,” see P. S., passim, and especially 35-37, 292, 327; for 
Zorokothora-Melchizedek and Ieou, see “The Books of the Saviour,” ibid., 365 ff.; and for Gabriel and Michael, ibid., 
138. 


- 119 - 



II 

References and Fragments in the Fathers 



i. 

JUSTIN MARTYR 

i. Cohortatio ad Gentiles, xxxviii.; Otto (J. C. T.), ii. 122 (2d ed., Jena, 1 849). 49S 

THE MOST ANCIENT OF PHILOSOPHERS 

NOW if any of you should think that he has learnt the doctrine concerning 
God from those of the philosophers who are rnentioned arnongyou as most 
ancient \ let him give ear to Ammon and Hermes. For Ammon in the 
Words (Fogoi) concerning himself 499 calls God “ utterly hidden”; while 
Hermes clearly and plainly declares: 

To understand God is difficult ; to speak [of Him] impossible, even for one 
who can understand . 500 


THE ‘WORDS OF AMMON” 

This passage occurs at the very end of the treatise. Justin will have it that the most 
ancient of all the philosophers are on his side. 

These are Ammon and Hermes. Justin, moreover, knows of certain Words (Logoi), 
or Sermons, or Sacred Utterances of Ammon, which must have been circulating in 
Greek, otherwise it is difficult to see how Justin was acquainted with them. They 
were evidendy of an apocalyptic nature, in the form of a self-revelation of Ammon 
or God. 

These “Words of Ammon” have clearly nothing to do with the Ammonian type of 
the surviving Trismegistic literature, where Ammon is a hearer and not an 
instructor, least of all the supreme instructor or Agathodaimon. In them we may 


498 The Exhortation is considered by most pseudepigraphic, but is supposed by others to be the earliest work of Justin, 
which may be placed conjecturally about 130 A.D.; the First Apology is generally ascribed to the year 148 A.D. 

499 Taking the reading nsgi Eautou (Otto, n. 13), adopted in R. 138. 

500 Quoted also by Lactantius, D. I. Epit., 4; Cyril Alex., Con.JuL, i. 31; and Stobasus, Flor., lxxx. [lxxviii.], 94 (Ex. ii. 1). 


- 120 - 



see an intermediate stage of direct dependence of Hellenistic theological literature 
on Egyptian originals, for we have preserved to us certain Hymns from the El- 
Khargeh Oasis which bear the inscription “‘The Secret Words of Ammon’ which 
were found on Tables of Mulberry- wood .” 51 11 

THE INEFF ABILITY OF GOD 

The sentence from Hermes is from a lost sermon, a fragment of which is preserved 
in an excerpt by Stobasus. It was probably the opening words of what Stobasus calls 
“The [Sermon] to Tat ,” 5 " 2 that is to say, probably one of the “Expository Sermons 
to Tat,” as Lactantius calls them . 1 " 1 

The idea in the saying was a common place in Hellenistic theological thought, and 
need not be always directly referred to the much-quoted words of Plato: “To find 
the Father and the Maker of this universe is a [great] work, and finding [Him] it is 
impossible to tell [Him] unto all .” 504 Indeed, it is curious to remark that Justin 
reproduces the text of the Hermetic writer far more faithfully than when he refers 
directly to the saying of Plato . 505 

ii. I. Apologia, xxi; Otto, i. 54. 

HERMES AND ASCLEPIUS SONS OF GOD 

And when we say that the Word (Logos) which is the first begetting of 
God, was begotten without intercourse, — -Jesus Christ, our Master, — and 
that he was crucified, and was dead, and rose again and ascended into 
heaven, we bring forward no new thing beyond those among you who are 
called Sons of Zeus. For ye know how many Sons the writers who are held 
in honour amongyou ascribe to Zeus: — Hermes, the Word (Logos), who 
was the interpreter and teacher of all; and Asclepius, who was also 506 a 
healer , 507 and ivas smitten by the bolt [of his sire] and ascended into heaven 
. . . [and many others] . . . 


501 R. 138. The connection between this Ammon and Hermes was probably the same as that which is said to have 
existed between the king-god Thamus-Ammon and the god of invention Theuth-Hermes. Thamus-Ammon was a 
king philosopher, to whom Theuth brought all his inventions and discoveries for his (Ammon’s) judgment, which 
was not invariably favourable. See the pleasant story told by Plato, Vhadrus, 274 C. Cf. also the notes on Kneph- 
Ammon, K K., 19, Comment. 

502 Stob., loc. infra tit. 

503 See Fragg. xi., xii., xiii., xv., xx., xxii., xxiii., xxiv. (?). 

504 Timaus, 28 C. 

505 See Cohort., xxii.; II. ApoL, x. Clemens Alex., Origen, Minutius Felix, Lactantius, and other of the Fathers also 
quote this saying of Plato. 

506 That is, like Jesus. 

507 6sga7tsuTf|v (therapeut). 


- 121 - 



in. Ibid., xxii.; Otto, i. 58. 


HERMES THE WORD WHO BRINGS TIDINGS FROM GOD 

But as to the Son of God called Jesus, — even though he were only a man 
[born] in the common way, [yet] because of [his] wisdom is he worthy to be 
called Son of God; for all writers call God “Father of men and gods. ” Jin id 
if we say further] that he was also in a special way, beyond his common 
birth, begotten of God [as] Word (Logos) of God, let us have this in 
common with you who call Hermes the Word [Logos j who brings tidings 508 
from God. 


THE SONS OF GOD IN HELLENISTIC THEOLOGY 

It is remarkable that Justin heads the list of Sons of God — Dionysus, Hercules, 
etc. — with Hermes and Asclepius. Moreover, when he returns to the subject he 
again refers to Hermes and to Hermes alone. This clearly shows that the most 
telling parallel he could bring forward was that of Hermes, who, in the Hellenistic 
theological world of his day, was especially thought of under the concept of the 
Logos. 

The immediate association of the name of Asclepius with that of Hermes is also 
remarkable, and indicates that they were closely associated in Justin’s mind; the 
indication, however, is too vague to permit of any positive deduction as to an 
Asclepius-element in the Trismegistic literature current in Rome in Justin’s time. 
Justin, in any case, has apparently very little first-hand knowledge of the subject, for 
he introduces the purely Hellenic myth of Asclepius being struck by a thunderbolt, 
which, we need hardly say, is entirely foreign to the conception of the Hellenistic 
Asclepius, the disciple of Hermes. 

AN UNVERIFIABLE QUOTATION 

To these quotations Chambers (p. 139) adds the following passage from II. 
Apologia , vi., — which in date may be placed some four or five years after the First. 

“Now to the Father of all no name can be given; seeing that He is 
ingenerable; for by whatsoever na?ne one ?nay be called, he has as his elder 
the one who gives the name. But Father, ’ and God, ’ and ‘Creator, ’ and 
‘Ford, ’ and ‘Master’ are not names, but terms of address [derived] from 
His blessings and His works. ” 

It is quite true that this passage might be taken verbally from a Hermetic tractate, 
but I can find no authority in the text of Justin for claiming it as a quotation. For 
the same idea in Hermes compare C. H., v. (vi.) 10, and Lact., D. I., i. 6. 


508 xov Tiaga 6so\5 ayveXTixov. Compare Plutarch, De Is. et Os., xxvi. 5. 


- 122 - 



II. 

ATHENAGORAS 


Eibellus pro Christian i/ 09 , xxviii.; Schimrt ^ (E.),p. 57, 24 (Leipzig, 1 891 ). 5 10 

ATHENAGORAS was acquainted with a Greek literature circulated under the name 
of Hermes Trismegistus, to whom he refers as authority for Inis euhemeristic 
contention that die gods were once simply men. 111 

III. 

CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA 512 

i. Protrepticus, ii. 29; Dindorf (G.), i. 29, (Oxford, 1869) — (24 P., 8 S.). 

MANY HERMESES AND ASCLEPIUSES 

AFTER referring to the three Zeuses, five Adienas, and numberless Apollos of 
complex popular tradition, Clement continues: 

But what were I to mention the many Asclepiuses, or the Hermeses that 
are reckoned up, or the Hephcestuses of rnythology? 

Clement lived in the very centre of Hellenistic theology, and his grouping together 
of the names of Asclepius, Hermes and Hephaestus, the demiurgic Ptah, whose 
tradition was incorporated into the Poemandres doctrine, is therefore not 
fortuitous, but shows that these three names were closely associated in his mind, 
and that, therefore, he was acquainted with the Trismegistic literature. This 
deduction is confirmed by the following passage. 

ii. Stromateis, I. xxi. 134; Dindorf, ii. 108 (399 P., 144 S.). 

THE APOTHEOSIS OF HERMES AND ASCLEPIUS 

Of those, too, who once lived as men among the Egyptians, but who have 
been made gods by human opinion, [are] Hermes of Thebes and Asclepius 
of Memphis. 

To this we may appropriately append what Clement has to tell us about the “Books 
of Hermes,” when, writing in the last quarter of the second century, he describes 
one of the sacred processions of the Egyptians as follows: 

in. Ibid., HI. iv. 35; Dind., in. 156, 157. 


509 Written probably about 176-177 A.D. 

510 In Texte n. Untersuchungen (von Gebhardt and Harnack), Bd. iv. 

511 Cf. R, pp. 2 and 160. 

512 FI., 175-200 A.D. 


- 123 - 



THE BOOKS OF HERMES 


First comes the “ Singer ” bearing some one of the symbols of music. This 
[priest], they tell us, has to make himself master of two of the “Books of 
Hermes,” one of which contains (1) Hymns [in honour] of the Gods 5 ' 3 , 
and the other (2) Reflections 514 on the Kingly Hife. 

After the “Singer” comes the ‘ Time-watcher ” bearing the symbols of the 
star-science, a dial after a hand and phoenix. He must have the division of 
the ‘ Books of Hermes” which treats of the stars ever at the tip of his 
tongue — there being four of such books. The first of these deals with (3 ) the 
Ordering of the apparently Fixed Stars 515 , the next [two] (4 and 5) with 
the conjunctions and variations of Fight of the Sun and Moon, and the last 
(6) with the Risings [of the Stars]. 

Next comes the “Scribe of the Mysteries, ” with wings on his head, having 
in either hand a book and a ruled 16 in which is the ink and reed pen with 
which they write. He has to know what they call the sacred characters, and 
the books about (7) Cosmography, and (8) Geography, (9) the 
Constitution of the Sun and Moon, and (10) of the Five Planets, (11) the 
Survey of Egypt, and (12) the Chart of the Nile, (13) the Fist of the 
Appurtenances of the Te?nples and (14) of the Fands consecrated to the?n, 
(15) the Measures, and (16) Things used in the Sacred Rites. 

After the above-mentioned comes the “Overseed 17 of the Ceremonies,” 
bearing the cubit of justice and the libation cup [as his symbols]. He must 
know all the books relating to the training [of the conductors of the public 
cult], and those that they call the victim-sealing 518 books. There are ten of 
these books which deal with the worship which they pay to the gods, and in 


513 I have numbered the books and used capitals for greater clearness. 

514 EKkoyiofrov; I do not know what this term means in this connection. The usual translation of “Regulations” seems 
to me unsatisfactory. Some word such as “Praise” (? read sukoyiogov) seems to be required, as may be seen from the 
title of C. H., (xviii.), “The Encomium of Kings.” 

515 tcov otTiXavcov tpaivoftsvwv acrrgwv. 

516 xavova.; this must mean a hollow wooden case shaped like a ruler. 

517 otoXictt%, called also iegocrcoXo?. This priestly office is usually translated as the “keeper of the vestments,” the 
“one who is over the wardrobe.” But such a meaning is entirely foreign to the contents of the books which are 
assigned to him. He was evidently the organiser of the ceremonies, especially the processions. 

518 [ioaxooifQayiauKcn — that is to say, literally, books relating to the art of one who picks out and “seals calves” for 
sacrifice. The literal meaning originally referred to the selection of the sacred Apis bull-calf, into which the power of 
the god was supposed to have re -incarnated, in the relic of some primitive magic rite which the conservatism of the 
Egyptians still retained in the public cult. Its meaning, however, was later on far more general, as we see by the 
nature of the books assigned to this division. Boulage, in his Mysteres d’Isis (Paris, 1820, p. 21), says that “the seal of 
the priests which marked the victims was a man kneeling with his hands bound behind his back, and a sword pointed 
at his throat, for it was in this attitude that the neophyte received the first initiation, signifying that he agreed to 
perish by the sword if he revealed any of the secrets revealed to him.” This he evidently deduced from Plutarch’s De 
Is. et Or., xxxi. 3. 


- 124 - 



which the Egyptian cult is contained; namely [those which treat] of (17) 
Sacrifice, (18) First-fruits, (19) Hymns, (20) Prayers, (21) Processions, 

(22) Feasts, and (23-26) the like. 

After all of these comes the “Prophet” clasping to his breast the water-vase 
so that all can see it; and after him follow those who carry the bread that is 
to be distributed. 519 The “Prophet” as chief of the temple, learns by heart 
the ten books which are called “hieratic”; these contain the volumes (27- 
36) treating of the Fairs, and the Gods, and the whole Discipline of the 
Priests. For you must know that the “Prophet” among the Egyptians is 
also the supervisor of the distribution of the [temple] revenues. 

Now the books which are absolutely indispensable for Hermes are 
forty -two in number. Six-and-thirty of them, which contain the whole 
wisdom-discipline 522 of the Egyptians, are learned by heart by the [grades of 
priests] already mentioned. The remaining six are learned by the “Shrine- 
bearers” 525 ; these are medical treatises dealing with (37) the Constitution of 
the Body, with (38) Diseases, (39) Instruments, (40) Drugs, (41) Eyes 524 , 
and finally (42) with the Maladies of Women. 

THE GENERAL CATALOGUE OF THE EGYPTIAN PRIESTLY LIBRARY 

This exceedingly interesting passage of Clement gives us the general catalogue of 
the Egyptian priestly library and the background of the Greek translations and 
adaptations in our Trismegistic writings. 

The whole of these writings fall into this frame, and the oldest deposit or 
“Poemandres” type fits in excellently with the content of the hieratic books (the 
titles of which Clement has unfortunately omitted), or with those that were kept 
secret. These hieratic books were evidently the more important and were in charge 
of the “Prophet,” that is to say, of those high priests of the temples who were 


519 oi if]v EXTtejjujnv xcov agxwv (3acrxaCovxe?. The “Prophet” belonged to the grade of high priests who had practical 
knowledge of the inner way. As the flood of the Nile came down and irrigated the fields and brought forth the grain 
for bread, and so gave food to Egypt, so did the living stream of the Gnosis from the infinite heights of space pour 
into the Hierophant, and he in his turn became Father Nile for the priests, his disciples, who in their turn distributed 
the bread of knowledge to the people. A pleasing symbolism, of which the bread and water of the earlier ascetic 
schools of Christendom, who rejected wine, was perhaps a reminiscence. Nor has even the General Church in its 
older forms forgotten to sprinkle the people from the water-vase and distribute among them the bread. 

520 This seems to suggest that there were others, the knowledge of which was optional, or rather reserved for the few. 
There may perhaps have been forty-nine in all. 

521 That is, the priesthood. 

522 Lit. philosophy. 

523 Ttaaxotpogoi, those who carried the pastos as a symbol; this apparently symbolized the shrine or casket of the soul; 
in other words, the human body. These Pastophors were the priests who were the physicians of the body, the higher 
grades being presumably physicians of the soul. 

524 This seems to be an error of the copyist. 


- 125 - 



directors of the prophetic discipline, the very subject of our “Poemandres” 
treatises. 


IV. 

TERTULLIAN 526 


i. Contra Valentinianos, xv.; CEhler (F.), ii. 402 (Leipzig, 1844). 

HERMES THE MASTER OF ALL PHYSICS 

WRITING sarcastically of the Gnostic Sophia- myth, Tertullian exclaims: 

Well, then, let the Pythagoreans learn, the Stoics know, [yea, ] Plato even, 
whence matter — which they [sc. the Pythagoreans and the rest] would have 
to be ingenerable — derived its source and substance to [form] this pile of a 
world, — [a mystery] which not even the famous Thrice-greatest Hermes, the 
master of all physics, has thought out. 

The doctrine of Hermes, and of Hellenistic theology in general, however, is that 
matter comes from the One God. It is remarkable that Tertullian keeps his final 
taunt for that school which was evidently thought the foremost of all — that of the 
“famous Thrice-greatest Hermes.” 

ii, De Anima, ii.; CEhler, ii. 558. 

HERMES THE WRITER OF SCRIPTURE 

Inveighing against the wisdom of the philosophers, Tertullian says: 

She [ philosophy ] has also been under the impression that she too has drawn 
from what they [the philosophers] consider “sacred” scriptures; because 
antiquity thought that most authors were gods (deos), and not merely 
inspired by them (divos), — as, for instance, Hgyptian Hermes, with whom 
especially Plato had intercourse 527 , . . . [and others] .... 

Here again, as with Justin, Hermes heads the list; moreover, in Tertullian’s mind, 
Hermes belongs to antiquity, to a more ancient stratum than Pythagoras and Plato, 
as the context shows; Plato, of course, depends on Hermes, not Hermes on Plato; 
of this Tertullian has no doubt. There were also “sacred scriptures” of Hermes, and 
Hermes was regarded as a god. 


525 As to the hieroglyphic inscription at Edfu, which was thought by Jomasd to contain references to the titles of 
these forty-two books, see Parthey, Uberlsis und Osiris, p. 255. 

526 FI, c. 200-216 A.D. 

527 Adsuevit. 


- 126 - 



Hi. Ibid., xxviii.; CEhler, ii. 601 . 


HERMES THE FIRST TEACHER OF REINCARNATION 

What then is the value nowadays of that ancient doctrine ?nentioned by 
Plato 528 , about the reciprocal migration of souls; how they remove hence and 
go thither, and then return hither and pass through life, and then again 
depart from this life, made quick again from the dead? Some will have it 
that this is a doctrine of Pythagoras; while Albinus 529 will have it to be a 
divine pronouncement, perhaps of Egyptian Hermes. 

iv. Ibid., ssnsciscii i, y C Phler ; ii. 610. 

HERMES ON METEMPSYCHOSIS 

Arguing ironically against the belief in metempsychosis, Tertullian writes: 

Even if they [souls] should continue [unchanged] until judgment [is 
pronounced upon them] ... a point which was known to Egyptian 
Hermes, when he says that the soul on leaving the body is not poured back 
into the soul of the universe, but remains individualized 530 : 

FRAGMENT I. 

That it may give account unto the Father of those things which it hath done 
in body. 

This exact quotation 5 ' 1 is to be found nowhere in the existing remains of the 
Trismegistic literature, but it has every appearance of being genuine. 

CEhler (note c) refers to C. H., x. (xi.) 7, but this passage of “The Key” is only a 
general statement of the main idea of metempsychosis. 

A more appropriate parallel is to be found in P. S. A.., xxviii. 1: “When, [then,] the 
soul’s departure from the body shall take place, — then shall the judgment and the 
weighing of its merit pass into its highest daimon’s power” — a passage, however, 
which retains far stronger traces of the Egyptian prototype of the idea than does 
that quoted by Tertullian. 


528 Cf. Phado, p. 70. 

529 A Platonic philosopher, and contemporary of Galen (130-P200 A.D.). 

530 Determinatam. 

531 Tertullian marks it by an “inquit.” 


- 127 - 



V. 

CYPRIAN 532 

i. De Idolorum Hanitate, vi.; Balu^e, p. 220 (Paris , 1726). 

GOD IS BEYOND ALL UNDERSTANDING 

THRICE-GrEATEST Hermes speaks of the One God, and confesses 
Him beyond all understanding and all appraisement. 

This is evidently a reference to the most quoted sentence of Hermes. See Justin 
Martyr i. below, and other references. 

Chambers (p. 140), after this notice in Cyprian, inserts a passage from Eusebius ( c. . 
325 A.D.), which he says is “a clear quotation from the ‘Poemandres’ of Hermes, 
whom, however, he [Eusebius] probably confounds with the Shepherd of 
Hermas.” 

Eusebius (Hist. Ecc., v. 8), however, quotes I re me us (iv. 20, 2), who quotes literally 
The Shepherd of Hermas (Mand., i.). Indeed, it is the most famous sentence in that 
early document. See the list of its quotations by the Fathers in the note to Gebhardt 
and Harnack’s text (Leipzig, 1897), p. 70. Such verbal exactitude is not to be found 
in the remaining Trismegistic literature; the idea, however, is the basis of the whole 
Trismegistic theology. 


VI. 

ARNOBIUS 533 

i. Adversus Nationes, ii. 1 3; Hildebrand ( G. F.),p . 136 (Halle, 1844). 

THE SCHOOL OF HERMES 

ARNOBIUS complains that the followers of the philosophic schools laugh at the 
Christians, and selects especially the adherents of a certain tradition as follows: 

You, you I single out, who belong to the school of Hermes, or of Plato and 
Pythagoras, and the rest of you who are of one mind and walk in union in 
the same paths of doctrine . 534 


532 About 200-258 A.D. 

533 He was a converted philosopher, and the teacher of Lactantius; flourished about 304 A.D. 

534 Here again, as elsewhere, Hermes comes first; he was evidently regarded as the leader of philosophic theology as 
contrasted with popular Christian dogmatics. See R. 306. 


- 128 - 



VII. 

LACTANTIUS 535 


i. Divince Institutiones, i. 6, 1; Brandt, p. 1 8; Fritysche, i. 13. 5,6 

THOYTH-HERMES AND HIS BOOKS ON THE GNOSIS 

LuET us now pass to divine testimonies; but, first of all, I will bring into 
court testimony which is like divine [witness], both on account of its 
exceeding great age, and because he whom I shall name was carried back 
again from men unto the gods. 

In Cicero 537 , Caius Cotta 538 , the Pontifex, arguing against the Stoics about 
faiths and the diversity of opinions which obtain concerning the gods, in 
order that, as was the way of the Academics 539 , he might bring all things 
into doubt, declares that there were five Hermeses; and after enumerating 
four of them in succession, [he adds] that the fifth was he by whom Argus 
was slain 540 , and for that cause he fled into Egypt, and initiated the 
Egyptians into laws and letters. 

The Egyptians call him Thoyth, and from him the first month of their year 
( that is, September) has received its name. He also founded a city which 
even unto this day is called Hermopolis. The people of Phene us 541 , indeed, 
worship him as a god; but, although he was [really] a man, still he was of 


535 A pupil of Amobius; flourished at the beginning of the fourth century. 

536 Brandt (S.), L. Caeli Firmiani Factanti Opera Omnia, — Pars L, Divinae Institutiones et Epitome (Vienna, 1890). Pars II., to 
be edited by G. Laubmann, has not yet appeared. Fritzsche (O. F.), Dip. Institt. (Leipzig, 1842), 2 vols. 

537 De Nat/ira Deomm, iii. 22, 56. 

538 C. Aurelius Cotta, 124-76 (?) B.C. 

539 Cicero makes Cotta maintain the cause of this school both here and in the De Oratore. 

540 Argos, according to the many ancient myths concerning him, was all-seeing (TtavoTtxr]?), possessed of innumerable 
eyes, or, in one variant, of an eye at the top of his head. Like Hercules, he was of superhuman strength, and many 
similar exploits of his powers are recorded. In the Io-legends, Hera made Argos guardian of the cow into which the 
favourite of Zeus had been metamorphosed. Zeus accordingly sent Hermes to carry off his beloved. Hermes is said 
to have lulled Argos to sleep by means of his syrinx, or pipe of seven reeds, or by his caduceus, and then to have 
stoned him or cut off his head. See Reseller’s Ausfuhr. Eex. d. griech. u. riim. Myth., s.v. “Argos.” It is to be noticed that 
instead of Argum, four MSS. read argentum, which is curious as showing a Medieval Alchemical influence. See n. 4 to 
Ciceronis Opera Philosophica (Delph. et Var. Clas.), vol. ii. (London, 1830). 

541 Pheneata:, — Pheneus was a town in Arcadia, that country of ancient mysteries. (It is remarkable that Hermas is 
taken by the “Shepherd” in spirit to a mountain in Arcadia. See Shepherd of Hermas, Sim. ix. 1.) Cicero begins his 
description of the fifth Hermes with this statement, and Lactantius has thus awkwardly misplaced it. Pausanias (viii. 
14, 6) tells us that Pheneus itself was considered as a very ancient city, and that its chief cult was that of Hermes. 

This cult of Hermes, moreover, was blended with an ancient mystery- tradition, for Pausanias (ibid., 15, 1) tells us 
that: “The Pheneatians have also a sanctuary of Demeter sumamed Eleusinian, and they celebrate mysteries in her honour, alleging that 
rites identical with those performed at Eleusis were instituted in their land. . . . Beside the sanctuary of the Eleusinian goddess is what is 
called the Petroma, two great stones fitted to each other. Every second year, when they are celebrating what they call the Greater Mysteries, 
they open these stones, and taking out of them certain writings which bear on the mysteries, they read them in the hearing of the initiated, 
and put them back in their place that same night. 1 know, too, that on the weightiest matters most of the Pheneatians swear by the 
Petroma. ’’Frazer’s Translation, i. 393 (London, 1898). 


- 129 - 



such high antiquity , and so deeply versed in every kind of science ', that his 
knowledge of [so] many things and of the arts gained him the title of 
<r Thrice-greatest. ” 

He wrote hooks, indeed many [of them], treating of the Gnosis 542 of things 
divine, in which he asserts the greatness of the Highest and One and Only 
God, and calls Him by the same names as we [do] — God and Father . 543 
And [yet], so that no one should seek after His name, he has declared that 
He cannot be named, in that He doth not need to have a name, owing, 
indeed, unto the very [nature of His] unity . 544 His words are these 545 : 

FRAGMENT II. 

But God [is] one; and He who’s one needs not a name, for He [as one] is 
The-beyond-all-names. 

THE HISTORICAL ORIGINS OF THE HERMETIC TRADITION 

For Lactantius, then, Hermes was very ancient; moreover, he was one who 
descended from heaven and had returned thither. When, however, Firmianus 
attempts the historical origins of the Hermetic tradition, as was invariably the case 
with the ancients, he can do nothing better than refer us to a complex though 
interesting myth, and to a legend of it devised to flatter the self-esteem of its 
Hellenic creators: A Greek god, whose cult, moreover, was known to be intimately 
connected with an ancient mystery-tradition, was the originator of the wisdom of 
Egypt. Of course; and so with all nations who had any ancient learning — their 
special tradition was oldest and best and originator of all others! 

For the rest, Lactantius knows nothing historically of the tradition which he 
esteemed so highly, and the mention of the Latinized name Thoyth 546 and of 
Hermopolis 547 does but throw the paucity of his knowledge into deeper relief. What 
Lactantius does know is a large literature in Greek and its general tendency. 

The sentence he quotes is not found textually in any of the extant Trismegistic 
literature . 548 


542 Cognitionem. 

543 Cf. P. S. A., xx. (p. 42, 16, Goldb.) etpass.\ C. H., v. (vi.) 2. 

544 Compare with Epitome 4 below. 

545 Lactantius here quotes in Greek. Cf. P. S. A., xx. (p. 42, 27-43, 3, Goldb.). 

546 Was, however, this the spelling found in Cicero, for Firmianus takes it from the text of Tully? It is a pity we have 
no critical apparatus of the text of Lactantius, for the MSS. of Cicero present us with the following extraordinary list 
of variants: Then, Ten, Their, Thoyt, Theyt, Theyn, Thetum, Them, Thernum, Theutatem, Theut, Thoyth, Thoth. 
See n. 5 to the text of Cicero, cited above. Cf. R. 117, n. 2. 

547 Which he probably took from P. S. A., xxxvii. 4: “Whose home is in a place called after him.” 

548 Chambers (p. 41, n. 1), in referring it to C. H., v. (vi.) 10, is mistaken. 


- 130 - 



ii. Ibid., i. 1 1 , 61 ; Brandt, p. 47; Fritysche, i. 29, 30. 

URANUS, CRONUS AND HERMES, ADEPTS OF THE PERFECT SCIENCE 

And so it appears that he [Cronus] ivas not born from Heaven ( which is 
impossible ), but from that man who was called Uranus; and that this is so, 
Trismegistus bears witness, when, in stating that there have been very few in 
whom the perfect science has been found, he mentioned in their number 
Uranus, Cronus and Hermes, his own kinsfolk . 549 

Hi. Ibid., ii. 8, 48; Brandt, p. 138; Fritysche, i. 89. 

DIVINE PROVIDENCE 

For the World was made by Divine Providence, not to mention Thrice- 
greatest, who preaches this . 550 

iv. Ibid., ii. 8, 68; Brandt, p. 141 ; Fritysche, i. 91. 

ON MORTAL AND IMMORTAL SIGHT 

His [God’s] works are seen by the eyes; but how He made them, is not 
seen even by the mind, “in that, ” as Hermes says: 

FRAGMENT III. 

Aortal cannot draw nigh 551 to the Immortal, nor temporal to the Hternal, 
nor the corruptible to That which knoweth no corruption . 552 

And, therefore, hath the earthly animal not yet capacity to see celestial 
things, in that it is kept shut within the body as in a prison house, lest with 
freed sense, emancipate, it should see all. 

The first part of this citation (which Lactantius gives in Latin) is identical in idea 
with a sentence in Frag. iv. — that favourite source of quotation, which Stobasus, 
Ex. ii. A lor. lxxx. [lxxviii.] 9), excerpted from “The [Sermon] to Tat.” 511 It might, 
then, be thought that this was simply a paraphrase of Lactantius’, or that he was 
quoting from memory, and that the second sentence was not quotation but his own 


549 Cf. C. Pi., x. (xi.) 5; P. S. A., xxxvii. 1. Also Lact., Pipit., 14. In my commentary on the first passage I have shown 
that Lactantius is probably here referring to a lost Hermetic treatise. 

550 Cf. Fragg. ap. Stob., Eel, i. 5, 16, 20. It is to be noticed from the context that Lactantius places Trismegistus in a 
class apart together with the Sibylline Oracles and Prophets, and then proceeds to speak of the philosophers, 
Pythagoreans, Platonists, etc. He also repeats the same triple combination in iv. 6. 

551 Propinqitare. L. glosses this as meaning “come close to and follow with the intelligence.” 

552 Cf. Frag. ap. Cyril, C. I., i. (vol. vi., p. 31 C). 

553 Compare also Lact., Epit, 4. 


- 131 - 



writing. But the second sentence is so thoroughly Trismegistic that it has every 
appearance of being genuine. 554 

v. Ibid., ii. 10, 13; Brandt, p. 149; Fritfsche, i. 96. 

MAN MADE AFTER THE IMAGE OF GOD 

But the making of the truly living man out of clay 555 is of God. And 
Hermes also hands on the tradition of this fact, — for not only has he said 
that man was made by God after the Image of God 556 , but also he has 
attempted to explain with what skilfulness He has formed every single 
member in the body of man, since there is not one of them which is not 
admirably suited not only for what it has to do, but also adapted for 
beauty . 557 

Man made after the Image of God is one of the fundamental doctrines of the 
Trismegistic tradition. For instance, P. S. A., vii. 2: “The [man] ‘essential,’ as say the 
Greeks, but which we call the ‘form of the Divine Similitude’”; and x. 3: “Giving 
the greatest thanks to God, His Image reverencing, — not ignorant that he [man] is, 
too, God’s image, the second [one]; for that there are two images of God — 
Cosmos and man.” 558 


vi. Ibid,, ii. 12, 4; Brandt, p. 1 56; Frit^sche, i. 100. 

HERMES THE FIRST NATURAL PHILOSOPHER 

Empedocles 559 . . . [ and others] . . . laid down four elements, fire, air, 
ivater, and earth, — [in this] perchance following Trismegistus, who said 
that our bodies were composed of these four elements by God. 

‘For that they have in them something of fire, something of air, something 
of water, and something of earth, — and yet they are not fire [in itself, nor 
air, nor water, nor earth. ” 

All this about the elements is, of course, a commonplace of ancient physics, and we 
may, therefore, dismiss the naive speculation of Lactantius, who evidently thought 
he had the very words of the first inventor of the theory before him; for he renders 
into Latin word for word the same text which Stobasus has preserved to us in an 
excerpt from “The [Sermons] to Tat” — Ex. iii. I. 560 


554 It is interesting to note, in the history of the text-tradition, that the received reading ar][ji.f]vai (“be expressed”) in 
Stobteus stands in one MS. (A) au(ji(3fjvai, which seems to be a transference from the original of L.’s propinquare. 

555 Umo , — slime or mud. 

556 Lact. repeats this in vii. 4. Cf. C. H., i. 12. 

557 Cf. C. H, v. (vi.) 6. 

558 Cf. also Hermes-Prayer, iii. 11. R. 21, n. 11. 

559 Date c. 494-434 B.C. 

560 See also Ex. vii. 3; C. H., ii. (iii.) 11. 


- 132 - 



vii. Ibid., ii. 14, 5; Brandt, p. 1 63; Tritfsche, i. 105. 

THE DAI MON- CHIEF 

Thus there are two classes of daimons, — the one celestial, and the other 
terrestrial. The latter are impure spirits, the authors of the evils that are 
done 561 , of whom the same Diabolus is chief Whence Trismegistus calls 
him the “Daimon-chief ” 562 

viii. Ibid., ii. 15, 6; Brandt, p. 1 66; Tritgsche, i, 106. 

DEVOTION IS GOD-GNOSIS 

In fine, Hermes asserts that those who have known God, not only are safe 
from the attacks of evil daimons, but also that they are not held even by 
Tate . 563 He says: 


FRAGMENT IV. 

The one means of protection is piety. Tor neither doth an evil daimon nor 
doth Tate rule o'er the pious man . 564 Tor God doth save the pious [man] 
from every ill. The one and only good found in mankind is piety. 

And what piety means, he witnesses in another place, saying: 

“ Devotion is God-Gnosis. ” 565 

Asclepius, his Hearer, has also explained the same idea at greater length in 
that “Pefect Sermon ” which he wrote to the King. 

Toth, then, assert that the daimons are the enemies and harriers of men, 
and for this cause Trismegistus calls them “evil ‘angels',” 566 — so far was 
he from being ignorant that from celestial beings they had become corrupted, 
and so earthly. 

This passage is given in Greek, and is quoted, but with numerous glosses, also by 
Cyril ( 'Contra Julianum , iv. 130); it is also practically the same as the sentence in P. S. 
A., xxix.: “The righteous man finds his defence in serving God and deepest piety. 
For God doth guard such men from every ill.” 


561 Cf. C. H, ix. (x.) 3; C. H, xvi. 10. 

562 Saipoviagy^v. This term is not found in the extant texts; “Diabolus” is, of course, not to be referred to Hermes, 
but to the disquisition of Lactantius at the beginning of 14. 

563 Cf. Cyril, C.J., iv. (vol. vi. 130 E, Aub.). 

564 For the same idea, see C. H., xii. (xiii.) 9. 

565 r| ya.Q sucre (3eia yvrocrig Ecru ton 6sou, — which Lactantius in another passage (v. 14) renders into Latin as “Pietas 

autem nihil alind est quam dei notio, — is given in C. H., ix. (x.) 4 as: eucre(3eia 8s Ecru Oeoii (where Parthey notes no 

various readings in MSS.). 

566 a yysXou? Ttovr]gou?, — these words do not occur in our extant Greek texts; but the Lat. trans, of P. S. A., xxv. 4, 
preserves “nocentes angeli.” 


- 133 - 



Now we know that Lactantius had the Greek of this “Perfect Sermon” before him, 
and we know that our Latin translation is highly rhetorical and paraphrastic. 

The only difficulty is that Lactantius’ quotation ends with the sentence: “The one 
and only good found in mankind is piety”; and this does not appear in the Latin 
translation of P. S. A. On the other hand, Firmianus immediately refers by name to 
a Perfect Sermon, which, however, he says was written by Asclepius, and addressed 
to the King. Our Fragment is, therefore, probably from the lost ending of C. H., 
xvi. (see Commentary on the title). 

ix. Ibid., iv. 6, 4; Brandt, p. 286; Fritqsche, i. 1 78. 

THE COSMIC SON OF GOD 

Hermes, in that book which is entitled the “Perfect Sermon, ” uses these 
words: 


FRAGMENT V. 

The Lord and Master of all things (whom ’tis our custom to call God), 
ivhen He had made the second God, the Visible and Sensible, 56 ' — I call 
Him sensible, not that He hath sensation in Himself for as to this, 
whether o r no He hath Himself sensation, we will some other time enquire), 
but that He is object of senses and of mind, — when, then, He’d made Him 
First, and One and Only 568 , He seemed to Him most fair, and filled quite 
full of all things good. At Him he marvelled, and loved Him altogether as 
His Son . 569 

Lactantius here quotes from the lost Greek original of “The Perfect Sermon,” viii. 
1. We have thus a means of control li ng the old Latin translation which has come 
down to us. 

It is, by comparison, very free and often rhetorical; inserting phrases and even 
changing the original, as, for instance, when in the last clause it says: “He fell in 
love with him as being part of His Divinity.” 

It is, however, possible that the translator may have had a different text before him, 
for there is reason to believe that there were several recensions of the P. S. A. 570 


x. Ibid., iv. 6, 9; Brandt, p. 291 ; Fritysche, i. 179. 

THE DEMIURGE OF GOD 


567 Sc. the Logos as Cosmos. 

568 Cf. Frag. x. 

569 For last clause, see C. H., i. 12. Cf. also Ps. Augustin., C. Quinque Hanses, vol. viii., Append, p. 3 E, Maur. 

570 Lactantius himself also gives a partial translation of this passage in his Epitome, 42 (Fritz., ii. 140). 


- 134 - 



Speaking of the Son of God and identifying Him with the pre-existent Wisdom 
spoken of in Proverbs viii. 22, Lactantius adds: 

Wherefore also Trismegistus has called Him the “Demiurge of God. ” 571 

xi. Ibid, iv. 7, 3; Brandt, p. 292; Frit^sche, i. 1 79. 

THE NAME OF GOD 

Even then [when the world shall be consummated] 572 ’, it [God’s Name] 
will not be able to be uttered by the mouth of man, as Hermes teaches, 
saying: 


FRAGMENT VI. 

But the Cause of this Cause is the Divine and the Ingenerable Good’s 
Good-will, which 573 first brought forth the God whose Name cannot be 
spoken by the mouth of man . 574 

xii. Ibid., iv. 7, 3; Brandt, p. 293; Fritfsche, i. 1 79, 1 80. 

THE HOLY WORD ABOUT THE LORD OF ALL. 

A.nd a little after [he says] to his son: 

FRAGMENT VII. 

For that there is, [my] son, a Word [Fogos] of wisdom, that no tongue can tell, — a 
Holy 575 [Word] about the only Lord of all, the God before all thought, — whom to 
declare transcends all human power. 576 

xiii. Ibid., iv. 8, 5; Brandt, p. 296; Frit^sche, i. 181. 

HIS OWN FATHER AND OWN MOTHER 

But Hermes also was of the same opinion when he says: 

“His own father and His oivn mother. ” 577 


571 8'y](juouQYOv xofi . The exact words do not occur in our extant texts, but the idea is a commonplace of the 
Trismegistic doctrine; see especially P. S. A., xxvi.: “The Demiurgus of the first and the one God,” and Lact., ibid., 
vii. 18, 4: “God of first might, and Guider of the one God.” See also C. H., i. 10, 11, xvi. 18; Cyril, C.Jul, i. 33 (Frag, 
xiii.), and vi. 6 (Frag, xxi.); and Exx. iii. 6, iv. 2. Cf. also Ep. 14 below. 

572 Cf. vii. 18 below. 

573 Sc. will ((3o6Xt]aig). Cf. especially P. J. A., Commentary. 

574 This is plainly from the same source as the following Fragment. 

575 Cf. C. H., i. 5; and Lact. and Cyril , passim ( e.g. Fragg. xxi., xxii.). 

576 This passage and the preceding, then, are evidently taken from “The Sermons to Tat.” Lactantius quotes in 
Greek, and again refers to the passage in iv. 9. 

577 autOTiaTOga nod avnofjiqTOga — not found in the extant texts; but for the idea see C. H., i. 9. See also iv. 13, and 
Ep. 4 below. 


- 135 - 



xiv. Ibid., iv. 9, 3; Brandt, p. 300; Fritysche, i. 182, 183. 


THE POWER AND GREATNESS OF THE WORD 

Trismegistus, who has tracked out, I know not how, almost all truth, has 
often described the power and greatness of the Word (Logos), as the above 
quotation 578 from him shows, in which he confesses the Word to be Ineffable 
and Holy, and in that its telling forth transcends the power of man. 

xv. Ibid., iv. 13, 2; Brandt, p. 31 6; Fritysche, i. 190. 

THE FATHERLESS AND MOTHERLESS 

For God, the Father, and the Source, and Principle of things, in that He 
hath no parents, is very truly called by Trismegistus “father-less” and 
“mother-less ” 579 in that He is brought forth from none . 580 

xvi. Ibid., v. 14, 1 1 ; Brandt, p. 446; Fritysche, i. 256. 

PIETY THE GNOSIS OF GOD 

But “piety is nothing else than Gnosis of God,” 58 ' as Trismegistus has 
most truly laid doivn, as we have said in another place . 582 

xvii. Ibid., vi. 25, 1 0; Brandt, p. 579; Fritysche, ii. 60. 

THE ONLY WAY TO WORSHIP GOD 

Concerning justice, he [Trismegistus, who in this (namely concerning 
sacrifice) “agrees substantially and verbally with the prophets ”] has thus 
spoken: 

“Unto this Word (Logos), my son, thy adoration and thy homage pay. 

There is one way alone to worship God, — fit is] not to be bad. ” 

Here Lactantius translates literally from C. H., xii. (xiii.) 23, a sermon which now 
bears the title, “About the Common Mind to Tat.” Hermes, however, in the 
context of the quoted passage, is not writing “about justice,” and much less could 
the whole sermon be so entitled, if indeed Lactantius intended us so to understand 
it. But see the Commentary, C. H., xii. (xiii.) 6, and Ex. xi., “On Justice.” 


578 Ibid., iv. 7. 

579 otTiaxw q et apipcog. Cf. Lact., D. I., i. 7, 2 (Brandt). 

580 Terms not found in our extant texts; probably taken from the same source as the terms in iv. 8 above. 

581 Notio dei. 

582 Namely ii. 15, 6; q.v. for comment. 


- 136 - 



xviii. Ibid., v. 25, 1 1 ; Brandt, p. 579; Fritysche, ii. 60. 

THE WORTHIEST SACRIFICE TO GOD 

Also in that “P 'effect Sermon , ” when he heard Asclepius enquiring of his 
son 583 , whether it would be pleasing to his 584 father ; that incense and other 
perfumes should be offered in their holy rite to God \ [Hermes] exclaimed: 

FRAGMENT VIII. 

Nay , nay ; speak more propitiously, O [my] Asclepius l For very great 
impiety is it to let come in the mind any such thought about that One and 
Only Good. 

These things, and things like these, are not appropriate to Him. For He is 
full of all things that exist and least of all stands He in need [of aught]. 

But let us worship pouring forth our thanks. The [worthiest] sacrifice to 
Him is blessing, [and blessing] only. 

With this compare the passage in P. A. A., xli. 2 (p. 61, 16, Goldb.). Here again we 
have the means of controlling the old Latin translator, but not with such exactitude 
as before, for Lactantius has also turned the Greek text into Latin. But not only 
from die odier specimens of Lactantius’ Hermes translations, but also from his 
present close reproduction of the ordinary wording of the Trismegistic treatises, we 
may be further confident that the Old Latin translation is free, paraphrastic, and 
rhetorical, as we have already remarked. 

XIX. Ibid., vii. 4, 3; Brandt, p. 593; Fritysche, ii. 69. 

MAN MADE IN THE IMAGE OF GOD 

But Hermes was not ignorant that man was made by God and in the 
Image of God . 585 

xx. Ibid., vii. 9, 11; Brandt, p. 612; Fritysche, ii. 82. 

CONTEMPLATION 

Speaking of man being the only animal that has his body upright, and face raised to 
heaven, looking towards his Maker, Lactantius says: 

And this “looking” Hermes has most rightly named contemplation . 586 


583 That is, Hermes’ son Tat. 

584 That is, Tat’s father, Hermes. 

585 See above, ibid., ii. 10, 13, Comment. 

586 OsoTttiav = Oecoglav. See, for instance, C. H., xiv. (xv.) 1, and K. K, 1, 38, 51; also Frag. ap. Stob., Flar., xi. 23; and 
also compare C. H., iv. (v.) 2: “For contemplator (0sat%) of God’s works did man become.” It is also of interest to 


- 137 - 



XXI. Ibid., vii. 13, 3; Brandt, p. 624 Fritzs che, ii. 90. 

THE DUAL NATURE OF MAN 

Hermes, in describing the nature of man, in order that he might teach how 
he was made by God, brings forward the following: 

FRAGMENT IX. 

From the two natures, the deathless and mortal, He made one nature , — 
that of man, — one and the self-same thing' and having made the selfsame 
[man] both somehow deathless and somehow mortal, He brought him forth, 
and set him up betwixt 587 the godlike and immortal nature and the mortal, 
that seeing all he might wonder at all. 

WONDER THE BEGINNING OF PHILOSOPHY 

This idea of “wondering” was, doubtless, a commonplace in Hellenistic 
philosophical circles and looked back to the Platonic saying: “There is no other 
beginning of Philosophy than wondering.” Compare also one of the newest found 
“Logoi of Jesus,” from the rubbish heaps of Oxyrhynchus, which runs: “Let not 
him that seeketh . . . cease until he find, and when he finds he shall wonder; 
wondering he shall reign, and reigning he shall rest.” 388 

Wondering is the beginning of Gnosis; this makes a man king of himself, and thus 
master of gods and men, and so he has peace. The translation of (3occriksuasi by 
Grenfell and Hunt as “reach the kingdom” seems to me to have no justification. 

Lactantius here quotes the Greek text of P. S. A,, viii. 3, and so once again we can 
control the Old Latin version. The Church Father is plainly the more reliable, 
reproducing as he does familiar Hermetic phrasing and style; and we thus again 
have an insight into the methods of our rhetorical, truncated, and interpolated 
Latin Version. 

xxii. Ibid., vii, 18, 3; Brandt, p. 640; Fritgsche, ii. 99. 

THE COSMIC RESTORATION 

And Hermes states this [the destruction of the world ] 589 plainly. For in 
that book which bears the title of ‘ "The Perfect Sermon,” after an 
enumeration of the evils of which we have spoken, he adds: 


note that Justin Martyr {Dial. c. Ttyph., 218 c) enumerates the Theoretics or Contemplatives, among the most famous 
sects of Philosophers, naming them in the following order: Platonics, Stoics, Peripatetics, Theoretics, Pythagorics. 

587 Compare the “setting up betwixt” (ev psocp . . . I'Sguaev) with the “setting up” of the mind “in the midst” of C. H., 
iv. (v.) 3. 

588 Grenfell (B. P.) and Hunt (A. S.), New Sayings of Jesus, p. 13 (London, 1904). 

589 Cf. iv. 7 above. 


- 138 - 



FRAGMENT X. 


Now when these things shall be, as I have said, Asclepius, then will [our] 
Lord and Sire, the God and Maker of the First and the One God 590 , look 
down on what is done, and, making firm His Will, — that is the Good , — 
against disorder, recalling error, and purging out the bad, either by washing 
it away with waterflood, or burning it away with swiftest fire, or forcibly 
expelling it with war and famine, — He [then] will bring again His 
Cosmos to its former state, and so achieve its Restoration . 591 

xxiii. Ibid., Epitome, 4, 4; Brandt, p. 679; Fritysche, ii, 117. 

OF HERMES AND HIS DOCTRINE CONCERNING GOD 

Hermes, — who, on account of his virtue and knowledge of many arts, 
gained the title of Thrice-greatest, who also in the antiquity of his doctrine 
preceded the philosophers, and who is worshipped as god among the 
Egyptians, — declaring the greatness of the One and Only God with 
unending praises, calls Him God and Father, [and says] He has no name, 
for that He has no need for a distinctive name 592 , inasmuch as He alone is, 
nor has He any parents, in that He is both from Himself and by 
Himself . 593 

In writing to his son [Fat] he begins as follows: 

“ To comprehend God is difficult, to speak [of Him] impossible, even for 
one who can comprehend; for the Perfect cannot be comprehended by the 
imperfect, nor the Invisible by the visible. ” 594 

xxiv. Ibid., Ep., 14; Brandt, p. 685; Fritysche, ii. 121. 

A REPETITION 

Lactantius repeats in almost identical words what he has written in i. 11. 


590 Cf. Frag. v. 

591 Lactantius quotes the original Greek of P. T. A., xxvi. 1 (p. 48, 24, Goldb.), so that we can thus once more remark 
the liberties which the Old Latin translation has taken with the text. 

592 Cf. Frag. ii. 

593 See i. 6 and iv. 8 above. 

594 The first clause is a verbatim translation of the text of the Stobiean Extract ii., while the second is a paraphrase 
even of L.’s own version from the Greek (see ii. 8 above). We learn, however, the new scrap of information that the 
quotation is from the beginning of the sermon. 


- 139 - 



xxv. Ibid., hip., 37 (42), 2; Brandt, p. 712 ; Fritysche, ii. 140. 

PLATO AS PROPHET FOLLOWS TRISMEGISTUS 

By means of him [the Logos] as Demiurge 595 , as Hermes says, He [God 
the Father] hath devised the beautiful and wondrous creation of the world. . 

Finally Plato has spoken concerning the first and second God, not plainly 
as a philosopher, but as a prophet, perchance in this following Trismegistus, 
whose words I have added in translation from the Greek. 

Lactantius then translates verbally from the Greek text he has quoted in iv. 6, 4, 
omitting, however, the last clause and the parenthesis in the middle. 

VIII. 

AUGUSTINE 

i. De Civitate Dei, xxiii.; Hoffmann (E .), i. 392 (Vienna, 1 899-1 900). m 

THREE QUOTATIONS FROM THE OLD LATIN VERSION OF THE “PERFECT 

SERMON ” 

AUGUSTINE is arguing against the views of Appuleius (first half of the second 
century) on the cult of the “daimones,” and in so doing introduces a long 
disquisition on the doctrine of “Egyptian Hermes, whom they call Th rice-greatest,” 
concerning image -worship, or the consecrated and “ensouled,” or “animated,” 
statues of the gods. 

In the course of his remarks the Bishop of Hippo quotes at length from a current 
Latin version 597 of “The Perfect Sermon” or “Asclepius” (though without himself 
giving any title), which we see at once must have been the very same text that has 
come down to us in its entirety. It is precisely the same text, word for word, with 
ours; the variants being practically of the most minute character. 

First of all Augustine quotes from P. S. A., xxiii. 3, xxiv. 2. This “prophecy” of the 
downfall of the Egyptian religion Augustine naturally takes as referring to the 
triumph of Christianity, and so he ridicules Hermes “\qui\ tarn impudenter dolebat, 
quam imprudentur scieb at .” 

ii. Ibid., xxiv.; Hoffmann, i. 396. 

The Bishop of Hippo begins his next chapter with a quotation from P. L. A., 
xxxvii. 1, 2, on the same subject, and proceeds scornfully to criticise the statements 
of the Trismegistic writer. 


595 The reference to the “Demiurge” looks back to iv. 6, 9. 

596 Corpus Scriptorum DLcclesiasticorum Latinorum, vol. xxx. (Imp. Acad, of Vienna). The date of the writing of the treatise, 
De Civitate Dei, is fixed as being about 413-426 A.D. 

597 Hnjus JEgyptii verba, sicut in nostrum linguam interpretata sunt. 


- 140 - 



Hi. Ibid., xxv L; Hoffmann, i. 402. 

After quoting the sentence, from P. S. A . ., xxiv. 3, in which Hermes says that the 
pure temples of Egypt will all be polluted with tombs and corpses, Augustine 
proceeds to contend that the gods of Egypt are all dead men, and in support of Inis 
contention he quotes P. S. A., xxxvii. 3, 4. 

IX. 

CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA 598 

i. Contra ]ulianum, i. 30;Migne, col. 548 A. 599 

CYRIL’S CORPUS OF XV. BOOKS 

CYRIL, after claiming that Pythagoras and Plato obtained their wisdom in Egypt 
from what, he professes, they had heard of Moses there, proceeds: 

And I think the Egyptian Hermes also should be considered worthy of 
mention and recollection — he who, they say, bears the title of Thrice- 
greatest because of the honour paid him by his contemporaries, and, as some 
think, in comparison ivith Hermes the fabled son of Zeus and Maia. 

This Hermes of Egypt, then, although an initiator into mysteries 600 , and 
though he never ceased to cleave to the shrines of idols, is [nevertheless] 
found to have grasped the doctrines of Moses, if not with entire correctness, 
and beyond all cavil, yet still in part. 

For both [Hermes] himself has been benefited [by Moses], and reminder of 
this fact] has also been made in his own writings by [the editor] at Athens 
who put together the fifteen books entitled ‘ Hermaica . ” [This editor] writes 
concerning him [Hermes] in the first book, putting the words into the 
mouth of one of the p riests of the sacred rites: 

“In order then that we may come to things of a like nature (?), — have you 
not heard that our Hermes divided the whole of Egypt into allotments and 
portions, measuring off the acres with the chain 601 , and cut canals for 
irrigation purposes, and made nomes 602 , and named the lands [comprised in 
them] after them, and established the interchange of contracts, and drew up 


598 The date of Cyril’s patriarchate is 412-444 A.D. 

599 Migne (J. P.), Patrologice Cursus Completus, Series Grteca, tom. lxxvi. (Paris, 1859). S. P. N. Cyrilli . . . Pro Christiana 
Religione adversus Julianum Imperatorem Libri Decern. The text is also given R. 211, n. 1. 

600 TSXSCTT%. 

601 “Acres,” lit. = areas 100 Egyptian cubits square; and “chain,” lit. = measuring cord. 

602 Or provinces; Migne’s Latin translator gives this as “laws”! 


- 141 - 



a list of the risings of the stars, and [the proper times 603 ] to cut plants; and 
beyond all this he discovered and bequeathed to posterity numbers, and 
calculations, and geometry, and astronomy, and astrology, and music, and 
the whole of grammar?” 

This Corpus of XV. Books is evidently the source of Cyril’s information, and he 
takes the above quotation from the Introduction, which purported to be written by 
an Egyptian priest (as is also the case in the treatise De Mysteriis , traditionally 
ascribed to Jamblichus), but which Cyril says was written at Athens, by presumably 
some Greek editor. 61 ’ 4 

ii. Ibid., i. 3 1; Migne col. 549 B. 

THE INCORPOREAL EYE 

Thrice-greatest Hermes says somewhat as follows: 

(Cyril then quotes, with four slight verbal variants, the first four paragraphs of the 
passage excerpted by Stobasus, Ex. ii., and then proceeds without a break:) 

FRAGMENT XI. 

If, then, there be an incorporeal eye 605 , let it go forth from body unto the 
Vision of the Beautiful; let it fly up and soar aloft, seeking to see not form, 
nor body, nor [even] types 606 [of things], but rather That which is the 
Maker of [all] these, — the Quiet and Serene, the Stable and the 
Changeless One, the Self, the All, the One, the Self of self, the Self in self 
the Hike to Self [alone], That which is neither like to other, nor [yet] 
unlike to self, and [yet] again Himself . 607 

Though Cyril runs this passage on to the four paragraphs which in the Stobasan 
Extract are continued by three other paragraphs, I am quite persuaded that the 
Archbishop of Alexandria took the above from the same “Sermon to Tat” 608 as the 
Anthologist. 609 


603 Sc. of the moon. 

604 1 ) auvxeOeixcb? A0f]vr]ai, — a phrase which Chambers (p. 149) erroneously translates by “which he [Hermes] having 
composed for Athenians”! R. (p. 211, n. 1) thinks this redactor was some Neoplatonist. 

605 Sc. the soul. 

606 Sc. ideas. 

607 Masc., not neut., as are all the preceding “seifs.” There is also throughout a play on “self’ and “same” which is 
unreproducible in English. 

608 That is, presumably, the “First Sermon of the Expository [Sermons] to Tat” (see Comment to the Stobasan 
Excerpt). 

609 See also Fragg. xii., xiii., xv., xx., xxii., xxiii., xxiv. (?). 


- 142 - 



Hi. Ibid., i. 33; Migne, col. 552 D. 


THE HEAVENLY WORD PROCEEDING FORTH 

And Thrice-greatest Hermes thus delivers himself concerning God: 

FRAGMENT XII. 

For that His Word (Fogos) proceeding forth 610 , — all-perfect as he was, 
and fecund, and creative in fecund Nature, falling on fecunct 11 Water, 
made Water pregnant . 612 


THE PYRAMID 

And the same again [declares]: 

FRAGMENT XIII. 

The Pyramid, then, is below [both] Nature and the Intellectual World . 613 
For that it 614 hath above it ruling it the Creator-Word 615 of the Ford of 
all, — who, being the First Power after Him, [both] increate [and] infinite, 
leaned forth 616 from Him, and has his seat above, and rule o'er all that 
have been made through him. He is the First-born of the All-pe fection, 
His perfect, fecund and true Son . 617 

THE NATURE OF GOD ’S INTELLECTUAL WORD 

And again the same [Hermes], when one of the Temple-folk 618 in Egypt 
questions him and says: 


FRAGMENT XIV. 

But why, O most mighty Good Daimon, was he called by this name 
by the Ford of all — replies: 


61,1 R. (p. 43) glosses this with “out of the month of God,” but I see no necessity for introducing this symbolism. 

611 The adjective yovigo? (“fecund”) is applied to both Logos and Physis (Nature); it might thus be varied as seedful 
and fruitful, or spermal and productive. Cf. Frag. xiii. Text reproduced R. 43. 

612 Compare C. H., i. 8, 14, 15. This Fragment is also quoted, but plainly reproduced from Cyril, by Suidas (q.v.). 

613 That is, the Logos. 

614 Sc. the Pyramid, in physics the symbol of fire. See Frag. xxii. 

615 87](juouqyo v ^-oyov. Compare Lact., D. I, iv. 6, 9. 

616 ttgoxutjiaaa — is, projected, presumably with the idea of emanation. Compare the hymn: “O Fleavenly Word 
proceeding forth, Yet leaving not the Father’s side.” Compare the Ttagexutjiev of C. H., i. 14, and note. 

617 Compare C. H., i. 6, 9, 10; xiii. (xiv.) 3; xiv. (xv.) 3. For slightly revised text, see R. 243, n. 3. Reitzenstein thinks 
that the image which the writer had in his mind was the pyramid, or obelisk, with the sun-disk on the top. 

618 xegeviTCOv. The questioner was undoubtedly Osiris (see Frag. xix. below). Cyril then knows that “Osiris” was 
understood to stand for a grade of Egyptian priests. Cf. R. 131. 

619 Presumably the Logos. 

620 Presumably “Soul” (Psyche). 


- 143 - 



Yea, have I told thee in what has gone before, but thou hast not perceived 
it. 

The nature of His Intellectual Word (Logos) is a productive and creative 
Nature. This is as though it were His Po wer-of -giving-birth 6 2 1 , or [His] 
Nature, or [His] Mode of being or call it what you will, — only 
remembering this: that He is Perfect in the Perfect, and from the Perfect 
makes, and creates, and makes to live, perfect good things. 

Since, then, He hath this nature, rightly is He thus named. 622 

THE WORD OF THE CREATOR 

And the same [Hermes], in the First Sermon of the Expository 
[Sermons] to Tat, ” 623 speaks thus about God: 


FRAGMENT XV. 


The Word (Logos) of the Creator ; O [my] son, transcends all sight; He 
[is] self-moved; He cannot be increased, nor [yet] diminished; Alone is He, 
and like unto Himself [Alone], equal, identical, perfect in His stability, 
perfect in order; for that He is the One, after the God alone beyond all 
knowing. 

The first two Fragments (xi. and xii.) seem to be taken from the same sermon, the 
contents of which resembled the first part of the “Shepherd of Men” treatise; it has 
all the appearance of a discourse addressed to Tat, and probably came in “The 
Expository Sermons.” 

The third Fragment (xiii.) belongs to the more frankly Egyptian type, the 
Agathodaimon literature, in which Hermes, as the Good Spirit, figures as the 
teacher of the Mystery-god Osiris. 624 

The last Fragment (xv.) is so similar in its phrasing to Fragment xi., already given by 
Cyril (i. 31), that I am strongly inclined to think the Archbishop took both from the 
same source. If so, we can reconstruct part of “The First Sermon of the Expository 
[Sermons] to Tat,” the beginning of which (see Lact., Ep., 4) is also given by 
Stobasus, Ex. ii., with the heading from “The [Book] to Tat,” while he heads other 
extracts “From the [pi.] to Tat.” 625 


621 yeveoi?. 

622 This passage seems to refer to the identity of Soul and Logos. For revised text see R. 131, and the reference there 
to Plato, Cratyhts, 400 B, where soul, is explained by the word-play tpuas^t], that is, that which has physis, or 
nature, or the power of production. 

623 xcov tiqo? xov Tax 8ie£o8ixa>v. 

624 See Frag. xix. below, where Cyril (ii. 56) says that this type was found in the “Sermon to Asclepius,” that is, was 
put with the Asclepius-books in the collection which lay before him. 

625 See also Fragg. xi., xii., xiii., xx., xxii., xxiii., xxiv. (?). 


- 144 - 



v. Ibid., ii. 35; Migne, col. 556 A. 


MIND OF MIND 

And Hermes also says in the Third Sermon of those to Asclepius: 

FRAGMENT XVI. 

It is not possible such mysteries [as these] should be declared to those who 
are without initiation in the sacred rites. But ye, lend [me] your ears, [ears] 
of your mind! 

There was One Intellectual Tight alone, — nay, Tight transcending 
Intellectual Tight. He is for ever Mind of mind 626 who makes [that] Tight 
to shine. 

There was no other; [naught] save the Oneness of Himself [alone]. For ever 
in Himself [alone], for ever doth He compass all in His own Mind, — His 
Tight and Spirit . 627 


HE IS ALL 

And after some other things he says: 

FRAGMENT XVII. 

Without Him 628 [is] neither god, nor angel, nor daimon, nor any other 
being. For He is Tord of all, [their] Father, and [their] God, and Source, 
and Tfe, and Power, and Tight, and Mind, and Spirit. For all things are 
in Him and for His sake . 629 

CONCERNING SPIRIT 

And again, in the same Third Sermon of those to Asclepius, in reply to 
one who questions [him] concerning the Divine Spirit, the same [ Hermes ] 
says as follows: 


626 Cf. K. K, 16. 

627 That is, Light and Life. See C. H., i. 9: “God, the Mind, . . . being Life and Light.” 

628 Lit. outside of Him. 

629 For a fuller statement of the idea in this paragraph, see C. H., ii. (iii.) 14. Cyril thinks that the above two 
Fragments refer to the Father, Son (Mind of mind and Light of light) and Holy Ghost (the Divine supremacy and 
power), and is thus the source of the statement in Suidas (s.v. “Hermes”) that Trismegistus spoke concerning the 
Trinity. 


- 145 - 



FRAGMENT XVIII. 


Had there not been some Purpose 630 of the Hord of all, so that I should 
disclose this word (logos), ye would not have been filled with so great love 631 
to question me about it. Now give ye ear unto the rest of the discourse 
(logos). 

Of this same Spirit, of which I have already spoken many times, all things 
have need; for that it raises up all things, each in its own degree, and makes 
them live, and gives them nourishment, and (finally] removes them from its 
holy source , aiding the spirit , and for ever giving life to all, the [one] 
productive One. ” 

THE “TO ASCLEPIUS” OF CYRIL’S CORPUS 

From the above statements of Cyril we learn that in addition to “The Expository 
Sermons to Tat,” he had also before him a collection of “Sermons to Asclepius”; 
of these there were at least three. Was “The Perfect Sermon” one of this collection? 
It may have been; for the style of it is cast in the same mould as that of these 
Fragments in Cyril. 

Hermes, in the Third Sermon of Cyril’s collection, is addressing several hearers, for 
he uses the plural; so also in P. S. A., i. 2. Hermes addresses Asclepius, Tat, and 
Ammon. 

In the Third Sermon, Hermes also says: “It is not possible such mysteries should 
be declared to those who are without initiation in the sacred rites”; in P. S. A., i. 2, 
Hermes declares: “It is a mark of an impious mind to publish to the knowledge of 
the crowd 6 ’ 4 a tractate 635 brimming o’er with the full grandeur of divinity.” The 
numinis majestas (grandeur of divinity) is precisely the same idea as the Spirit, the 
“Divine supremacy and power,” as Cyril says referring to Hermes. 

Finally, in the if bird Sermon, Hermes makes the striking remark that the Love 
(epojc) of the Gnosis which urges on the disciples, is inspired by the Providence or 
Foresight of God — that is, by His Spirit; P. S. A., i. 28, ends with the words: “To 
them, sunk in fit silence reverently, their souls and minds pendent on Hermes’ lips, 
thus Love (epooq) Divine 636 began to speak.” 


630 Or Providence, Tigovoia. R. (203, n. 2) refers this to a belief that only when some internal prompting gave 
permission to the master to expand the teaching, could he do so. Cf. Appul., Metam., xi. 21, 22; P. S. A., i. 

631 £0W? TOIOWO?. 

632 That is, presumably, causing their seeming death. 

633 That is, the individual life-breath, unless the reading Eraxougov jcveupaxi is corrupt. The Latin translator in Migne 
goes hopelessly wrong, as, indeed, is frequently the case. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 13, Comment; P. S. A., vi. 4; Exx. iv. 2, xv. 
2, xix. 3. 

634 That is, the uninitiated, the profanum vulgus. 

635 Tractates', presumably logos in the original Greek. 

636 Cf. also P. S. A., xx. 2 and xxi. 1, 3. 


- 146 - 



The setting of the mode of exposition is then identical in the two Sermons, and we 
may thus very well refer them to the same collection. 

v. Ibid., ii. 52; Migne, col. 580 B. 

FROM “THE MIND” 

To this I will add what Thrice-greatest Hermes wrote ‘To his oivn 
Mind, — -for thus the Took is called. 

(Cyril then quotes, with very slight verbal variants, the last question and answer in 
C. H., xi. (xii.) 22.) 

In our Corpus the treatise is not written by Hermes to the Mind, but, on the 
contrary, it is cast in the mould of a revelation of “The Mind to Hermes,” and is so 
entitled. Cyril thus seems to have been mistaken. 637 It may, then, have been that in 
the copy which lay before the Church Father, the title read simply: “The Mind.” 

vi. Ibid., ii. 55; Migne, col. 586 D. 6,s 

OSIRIS AND THRICE-GREATEST AGATHODAIMON 

But I will call to mind the words of Hermes the Thrice-greatest; in ‘The 
Hsclepius” 639 he says; 

FRAGMENT XIX. 

Osiris said: How, then, 0 thou Thrice-greatest, [thou] Good Spirit 640 , did 
Earth in its entirety appear ? 

The Great Good Spirit made reply: 

By gradual drying up, as I have said; and when the many Waters got 
commandment ... 641 to go into themselves again, the Earth in its entirety 
appeared, muddy and shaking. 

Then, when the Sun shone forth, and without ceasing burned and dried it 
up, the Earth stood compact in the Waters, with Water all around. 642 


637 Cf. R. 128, n. 1. 

638 Texts of quotations reproduced in R. 127, n. 1. 

639 From the quotations we can see that this could not have been the special heading of the treatise from which Cyril 
quotes, and which plainly belongs to the Agathodaimon type. Cyril probably means that the treatise, in his collection, 
came under the general title, “The Asclepius.” 

640 Aya66? Saipcov. 

641 The reading is an untranslatable and TOU, where the lacuna is probably to be completed with “from the Lord of 
all.” 

642 A distinction is evidently drawn between the (heavenly) Water and water (the companion element of earth). The 
text is immediately continued in Frag. xxi. below. 


- 147 - 



“LET THERE BE EARTH” 


Further, in yet another place [he writes]: 

FRAGMENT XX. 

The Maker and the Ford of all thus spake: Fet there be Earth, and let 
the Firmament appear! 643 And forthwith the beginning of the [whole] 
creation, Earth, was brought into existence . 644 

THE GENERATION OF THE SUN 

So much about the Earth; as to the Sun, he again says as follows: 

FRAGMENT XXI. 

Then said Osiris: O thou Thrice-greatest, [thou] Good Spirit, whence came 
this mighty one ? 

Would’ st thou, Osiris, that we tell to thee the generation of the Sun, whence 
he appeared '? 

Fie came from out the Foresight of the Ford of all; yea, the Sun’s birth 
proceedeth from the Ford of all, through His Creative Holy Word . 645 

“LET THE SUN BE!” 

In like manner also in the ‘First Expository Sermon to Tat, ” he says: 

FRAGMENT XXII. 

Straightway the Ford of all spake unto His own Holy and Intelligible — to 
His Creative Word (Fogos): Fet the Sun be! 

And straightway with His word (logos), the Fire that hath its nature 
tending upward 646 , — I mean pure [Fire], that which gives greatest light, 
has the most energy, and fecundates the most, — Mature embraced ] 47 with 
her oivn Spirit, and raised it up aloft out of the Water. 648 


643 See C. H., i. 18, Commentary. 

644 This seems to be taken not from a different place in the “To Asclepius,” but from another sermon, or group of 
sermons, most probably from the “First Expository Sermon to Tat” — as may be seen by comparing its phrasing with 
Frag. xxii. See also Fragg. xi., xii, xiii., xv., xxii., xxiii., xxiv. (?). 

645 This is evidently an immediate continuation of Frag. xix. above. Cf. R. 126, n. 1, where the texts are reproduced. 

646 See Frag. xiii. below, concerning the pyramid. 

647 Embraced the Fire. 

648 Sc. the Water-Earth, one element, not yet separated, according to C. H., i. 5. For other probable quotations from 
this “First Expository Sermon to Tat,” see Fragg. xi., xii., xiii., xv., xx., xxiii., xxiv. (?). 


- 148 - 



After referring to Genesis i. 6: “And God said, Let there be a firmament in the 
midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters,” — Cyril proceeds: 

vii. Ibid., ii. 57;Migne, col. 588 C. 

THE FIRMAMENT 

Moreover the Hermes who is with them 649 Th rice-greatest mentions this 
[that is, the firmament] again. For he describes God as saying to His 
creations: 


FRAGMENT XXIII. 

I will encompass you with this Necessity, you who are disobedient to me 650 , 
which hath been laid on you as a Command through My own Word 
(Logos); for him ye have as Law. 

This quotation also is probably taken from the same source as the previous 
passage — that is, from the “First Expository Sermon to Tat.” The idea and setting, 
however, should also be compared widi the parallel in the K. K. Excerpt (Stob., 
Phys., xli. 44; Gaisf., p. 408): “O Souls, Love and Necessity shall be your lords, they 
who are lords and marshals after me of all,” — where the “after me” (psi’ Bps) 
might perhaps confirm the “up to me” in the preceding note as the more correct 
rendering. 

viii. Ibid., ii. 64; Migne, col. 598 D. 

FROM THE “TO ASCLEPIUS” 

For Hermes, who is called Thrice-greatest, writes thus to Asclepius about 
the nature of the universe: 

(Here follows with a few slight verbal variants the text of C. H., xiv. (xv.) 6, 7, 
beginning: “If, then, all things have been admitted to be two.”) 

A nd some lines after he proceeds in warmer language, setting forth a 
striking argument, and says: 

(Then follows §§ 8, 9 of the same sermon, except the third sentence, and § 10 
omitting the last sentence.) 651 

The same treatise must have lain before Cyril as that contained in our Corpus in the 
form of a letter with the heading, “Unto Asclepius good health of soul!” — for the 
Archbishop says that Hermes “writes thus to Asclepius.” 652 


649 Sc. the philosophers. 

650 tot? £ti ’ £ps, — lit. “against me,” or it may perhaps be “up to me.” Migne’s Latin translator gives “qiti in mea 
potestatis estis,” and Chambers (p. 153), “those from me”; neither of which can be correct. 

651 Cyril also twice omits the words “ignorance and jealousy” after “arrogance and impotence” in 8, and also the 
words “and yet the other things” in 9. 


- 149 - 



ix. Ibid., iv. 1 30; Migne, col. 702. 

THE SOLE PROTECTION 

After quoting Porphyry as warning against participation in blood-rites for fear of 
contamination from evil daimons, Cyril proceeds: 

And their Thrice-greatest Hermes seems also to be of the same opinion; for 
he, too, writes as follows, in the [sermon] “To Asclepius,” concerning those 
unholy daimons against whom we ought to protect ourselves, and flee from 
them with all the speed we can: 

‘The sole protection — and this we must have — is piety. For neither evil 
daimon, yea nor Fate, can ever overcome or dominate a man who pious is, 
and pure, and holy. For God doth save the truly pious man from every 
ill ,’ 655 

x. Ibid., viii. 274; Migne, col. 920 D. 

THE SUPREME ARTIST 

Moreover, their Thrice-greatest Hermes has said somewhere about God, the 
Supreme Artist 654 of all things: 

FRAGMENT XXIV. 

Moreover, as perfectly wise He established Order and its opposite 655 ; in 
order that things intellectual, as being older and better, might have the 
government of things and the chief place, and that things sensible, as being 
second, might be subject to these. 

Accordingly that which tends downward, and is heavier than the 
intellectual, has in itself the wise Creative Word (Logos ). 656 

xi. Ibid. (?). 

AN UNREFERENCED QUOTATION 

Chambers (p. 154) gives the following, “ Cyrill. Contra Julian., citing Hermes ” but 
without any reference, and I can find it nowhere in the text: 


652 Cf. Frag, iv., Comment. 

653 Cf. P. S. A., xxix. 1. A comparison of this with Frag, iv., quoted by Lactantius (ii. 15), and the Commentary 
thereon, shows clearly that Cyril has strengthened the original text by interpolations. Cyril’s quotation (v. 176) from 
Julian, in which the Emperor refers to Hermes, is given under “Julian.” 

654 agiaxoxeyvo'O, — an epithet applied by Pindar (Fr. 29) to Zeus. 

655 axa^iav. 

656 This seems somewhat of a piece with the contents of the “First Expository Sermon to Tat.” See Fragg. xi., xii., 
xiii., xv , xx., xxii., xxiii. 


- 150 - 




FRAGMENT XXV. 


If thou understandest that One and Sole God, thou wilt find nothing 
impossible; for It is all virtue. 

Think not that It may be in some one; say not that it is out of some one. 

It is without termination; it is the termination of all. 

Nothing contains It; for It contains all in Itself. 

What difference is there then between the body and the Incorporeal, the 
created and the Uncreated; that which is subject to necessity, and what is 
Free; between the things terrestrial and things Celestial, the things 
corruptible and things Eternal ? 

Is it not that the One exists freely and that the others are subject to 
necessity ? 


X. 

SUIDAS 657 


Uexicon, s.v. 'EQpirjQO TQiopityiozoq; Im. Bekker (Berlin 1854). 

HERMES SPEAKS OF THE TRINITY 

Hermes the Thrice-greatest. — He was an Egyptian sage, and flourished 
before Pharaoh. He was called Thrice-greatest because he spoke of the 
Trinity, declaring that in the Trinity there is One Godhead, as follows: 

Before Intellectual Eight was Eight Intellectual; Mind of mind, too, was 
there eternally, Eight-giving. There was naught else except the Oneness of 
this [Mind] and Spirit all-embracing. 

‘ Without this is nor god, nor angel, nor any other being. For He is Ford 
and Father, and the God of all; and all things are beneath Him, [all 
things are] in Him . 658 

The source of Suidas, or of his editor, is manifestly Cyril, C. J., i. 35 (Fragg. xvi., 
xvii.), of which a very garbled edition is reproduced. The same statement and 
passage is also quoted by Cedrenus, John Malalas, and the author of the Chronicum 
Hlexandrinum. See Bernhardy’s edition of Suidas (Halle, 1853), i. 527, notes.) Suidas 
then continues without a break: 


657 Date uncertain; some indications point to as late as the twelfth century; if these, however, are due to later 
redaction, others point to the tenth century. 

658 He is above them as Lord and Father, as Mind and Light; and they are in Him as Lady and Mother, as Spirit and 
Life. 


- 151 - 



‘His Word (Logos), all-perfect as he was, and fecund, and creative, falling 
in fecund Nature, yea in fecund Water, made Water pregnant. ” 659 

After saying this he has the following prayer: 

AN ORPHIC HYMN 

“Thee, Heaven, I adjure, wise work of mighty God; thee I adjure, Worf 60 
of the Lather which He spake first, when He established all the world! 

‘Thee I adjure, [O Heaven], by the alone-begotten Word (Logos j himself 
and by the Lather of the Word alone-begotten, yea, by the Lather who 
surroundeth all, — be gracious, be gracious!” 

This is not a prayer from Hermes, but three verses (the last somewhat altered) of 
an Orphic hymn excerpted from Cyril, ibid., i. 33 (Migne, col. 552 C), — lines also 
attributed to “Orpheus” by Justin Martyr. The last half of the prayer seems to be a 
pure invention of Suidas, or of his editor, based partially on Cyril’s comments. 

XI. 

ANONYMOUS 

And here we may conveniently append a reference to the Dialogue of an ancient 
Christian writer on astrology — a blend of Platonism, Astrology, and Christianity — 
entitled Hermippus de Astrologia Dialogue 661 , from the name of the chief speaker. 

This writer was undoubtedly acquainted with our Corpus, for he quotes (p. 9. 3) 
from C. H., i. 5; (p. 21, 5) from C. H., x. (xi.) 12; (p. 70, 17) from C. H., x. (xi.) 6; in 
a general fashion (p. 24, 25) from C. H., xvi.; and phrases (p. 12, 21 and p. 14, 13) 
from C. H., xviii. 


659 This is again, and this time almost verbally, taken from Cyril ibid., i. 33; Frag. xii. 

660 tpWVi]V. 

661 Kroll (G.) and Viereck (P.), Anonymi Christiani de Astrologia Dialogus (Leipzig, 1895). Cf. R. p. 210. 


- 152 - 



Ill 

References and Fragments in the 
Philosophers 



i. 

ZOSIMUS 

ON THE ANTHROPOS-DOCTRINE 

OSIMUS flourished somewhere at the end of the third and beginning of 
the fourth century A.D. He was a member of what Reitzenstein (p. 9) 
calls the Poimandres-Gemeinde , and, in writing to a certain Theosebeia, a 
fellow-believer in the Wisdom-tradition, though not as yet initiated into 
its spiritual mysteries, he urges her to hasten to Poimandres and 
baptize herself in the Cup. 662 The following quotation is of first importance for the 
understanding of the Anthropos-Doctrine or Myth of Man in the Mysteries. 

In one of the Books of his great work distinguished by the letter Omega, and 
dedicated to Oceanus as the “Genesis and Seed of all the Gods,” — speaking of the 
uninitiated, those still beneath the sway of the Heimarmene or Fate, who cannot 
understand his revelations, — he writes 663 : 

THE PROCESSIONS OF FATE. 

1. Such men [our] Hermes, in his “ Concerning Nature,” hath called 
mind-less, — naught hut “processions” 664 of Fate, — in that they have 
no notion 665 of aught of things incorporal, or even of Fate herself who 
justly leads them, hut they blaspheme her corporal schoolings, and have 
no notion of aught else hut of her favours. 



662 Op. sub. cit., p. 245. 

663 Berthelot, Les Alchimistes grecs, pp. 229 ff. For a revised text, see R. pp. 102-106. 

664 jtoptag,- — processions, shows, or pageants. Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 7: “Just as processions pass by in the middle of the 
way without being able to do anything but take the road from others, so do such men move in procession through 
the world led by their bodies’ pleasures.” 

665 Or “in that they display naught” — (pocvxocCofjiivou?. 


- 153 - 



“THE INNER DOOR” 


2. But Hermes and Zoroaster have said the Race of Wisdom-lovers is 
superior to Bate, by their neither rejoicing in her favours, — for they have 
mastered pleasures, — not by their being struck down by her ills, — for ever 
living at the “Inner Door, ” 666 and not receiving 667 from her her fair gift, 
in that they look unto the termination of [her] ills. 668 

3. On which account, too, Hesiod doth introduce Prometheus counselling 
Hpimetheus, and doth tell him 669 not to take the Gift 670 from Zeus who 
rules Olympus, but send it back again, — [thus] teaching his own brother 
through philosophy 671 to return the Gifts of Zeus, — that is, of Fate. 

4. But Zoroaster, boasting in knowledge of all things Above, and in the 
magic of embodied speech, 6 2 professes that all ills of Fate, — both special 
[ills] and general [ones], — are [thus] averted. 

AGAINST MAGIC 

5. Hermes, however, in his “About the Inner Door, ” doth deprecate [this] 
magic even, declaring that: 

The spiritual man, [the man] who knows himself 673 should not accomplish 
any thing by means of magic, e’en though he think it a good thing, nor 
should he force Necessity, but suffer [her to take her course], according to 
her nature and decree 674 ; [he should] progress by seeking only, through the 
knowledge of himself and God, to gain the Trinity 675 that none can name, 
and let Fate do whate’er she will to her own clay — that is, the body. 

FRAGMENT XXVI. 

6. And being so minded (he says), and so ordering his life, he shall behold 
the Son of God becoming all things for holy souls, that he may draw her 676 
forth from out the region of the Fate into the Incorporeal [Man]. 


666 Codd. svauXia. R. reads £v svocuXla, which is supported by the title of the Trismegistic treatise mentioned in the 
next paragraph but one. I feel almost tempted to propose to read £v dtiiXia — (fr. aiiXo? — “immaterial,” the being in a 
state free from uXr] or “matter”), and so to translate it “for ever living in the immaterial.” 

667 Codd. HaTaSexopevoi. R. reads xoctaSeyeaOai. I suggest xataSexopevoug. 

668 Codd. xaxrav, which I prefer to R.’s xaxov. 

669 Op. et. Dies, 86. 

670 Sc. Pandora; cf. §§ 14 and 19 below. 

671 Or wisdom-loving. 

672 Presumably what the Vaidic theurgist would call mantravidyd. 

673 Cf. C. H, i. 21. 

674 Or decision or judgment. 

675 xgiaSa 

676 Sc. the soul. 


- 154 - 



7 . For having power in all, He becometh all things, ivhatsoever He will 677 , 
and, in obedience to the Father [’s nod], through the whole Body doth He 
penetrate, and, pouring forth His Fight into the mind of every [soul], He 
starts it 678 back unto the Blessed Begion, 679 where it was before it had 
become corporal, — following after Him, yearning and led by Him unto the 
Fight. 


THOTH THE FIRST MAN 

8. And [there] shall it see the Picture 680 that both Bitos hath described, 
and thrice-great Plato, and ten-thousand-times-great Hermes, for Thoythos 
translated it into the first sacred tongue, — Thoth the First Man, the 
Intepreter of all things which exist, and the Name-maker' 83 for all 
embodied things. 684 

THE LIBRARIES OF THE PTOLEMIES 

9. The Chaldceans and Parthians and Medes and Hebrews call Him 686 
Adam, which is by intepretation virgin Earth, and blood-ref 86 Earth, 
and fiery 687 Earth, and fleshly Earth. 

10. And these indications were found in the book-collections 688 of the 
Ptolemies, which they stored away in every temple, and especially in the 


677 Cf. § 15 below. Zosimus is apparently condensing from the original. 

678 Sc. the soul or mind. 

679 Cf. S., § 9 in the Naassene Document. 

680 Ttivaxa — or tablet. 

681 Lit. translates. 

682 Priestly or hieratic. With this compare Syncellus’ ( Chron ., xl.) quotation, from Manetho’s Sothis, which declares that 
the first monuments recording the wisdom-mystery of most ancient Egypt “were engraved in the sacred language by 
Thoth, the first Hermes; after the Flood they were translated from the sacred language into the common tongue.” Cf. 
vol. i., ch. v., on “Hermes according to Manetho.” 

683 ovopatOTtoio?, — referring specially to the making of names or words corresponding to natural cries and sounds. 
Compare the Adam of Genesis. 

684 Cf. Plato, Philebus, 18 B: “Some god, or rather some godlike man, who in Egypt their tradition says was Theuth, 
observing that sound was infinite, first distinguished in this infinity a certain number of pure sounds [or vowels] , and 
then other letters [or sound elements] which have sound, but are not pure sounds [the semi -vowels]; these two exist 
[each] in a definite number; and lastly he distinguished a third class of letters, which we now call mutes; and divided 
these, and likewise the two other classes of vowels and semi-vowels, into their individual elements, and told the 
number of them, and gave to each and all of them the names of letters.” (Cf. Jowett’s Trans., 3rd ed., iv. 583, 584.) 

According to the number-system of the Gnostic Marcus, there are: seven vowels, eight semi-vowels, and nine 
mutes (F. F. F., p. 368). It is also of interest to notice that these elements of sound are applied to what Marcus calls 
the “Configuration of the Element” — ? Sound — (to oyripa ton atoi^siou); they constitute the Glyph (or Character, 
or Impression, or Expression) of the Figure (or Diagram) of the Man of Truth. In the phrase “Glyph of the Figure” 
(6 yagaxTf|Q ton Y6®PP aTO ?)> the word ygappa means either (i) a letter of the alphabet, or (ii) a note of music, or (iii) 
a mathematical figure or diagram (ibid., p. 367). Is there then any connection between the Pinax of Bitos and the 
Diagram of the Ophites referred to by Celsus? 

685 Sc. the First Man. 

686 Or of the nature of blood. 

687 Codd. Tiuga — ? Tiugia. 

688 Or libraries. 


- 155 - 



Serapeum, ivhen they invited Arenas, the chief priest of Jerusalem, to send 
a “Hermes, ,6>89 who translated the whole of the Hebrew into Greek and 
Egyptian. 690 

11 . So the First Man is called by us Thoyth and by them Adam, — not 
giving His [true] name in the Fanguage of the Angels, but naming Him 
symbolically according to His Body by the four elements [or letters] out of 
His whole Sphere, 691 whereas his Inner Man, the spiritual, has [also] both 
an authentic name and one for common use. 692 

NIKOTHEOS 

12. His authentic [name], however, I know not, owing to the so long [lapse 
of time 693 ]; for Nikotheos 694 who-is-not-to-be found alone doth know these 
things. But that for common use is Man (Phos ), 69 5 from which it follows 
that men are called photas. 


689 That is, a learned priest or scribe. 

690 Much translation of this kind was done at that period. Compare the Arabic translation of a “Book of Ostanes” 
(Berthelot, Fa Chinrie an Moyen Age, iii. 121), in which an old inscription on an Egyptian stele is quoted: “Have you not 
heard the story that a certain philosopher [i.e. Egyptian priest] wrote to the Magi in Persia, saying: ‘I have found a 
copy of a book of the ancient sages; but as the book is written in Persian, I cannot read it. Send me then one of your 
wise men who can read for me the book I have found?” R. 363. 

691 Presumably referring to the whole Body of the Heavenly Man, to whose Limbs all the letters were assigned by 
Marcus. 

692 TigoariyogiKov, — this signifies generally the pmnomen as opposed to the nomen proper. 

693 8 i 0 t to xsw?, — lit. “because of the so long”; otherwise I cannot translate the phrase. This would, then, presumably 
refer to the length of time since the physical tradition of the ancient Thoyth initiates had disappeared; or the length 
of time the soul of Zosimus had been revolving in Genesis. 

694 Lit. God-victor, — symbolizing the victory of the Inner God, or of a man who had raised himself to the status of a 
god. For Nikotheos, see the Gnostic “Untitled Apocalypse” of the Codex Brucianus (C. Schmidt, Gnos. Schrift. in 
kop. Sprach. aus d. C. B., p. 285), p. 12a: “Nikotheos hath spoken of Him [namely, the Alone -begotten, — see ibid., p. 
601], and seen Him; for he is one [sc. of those who have seen Him face to face]. He [N.] said: ‘The Father exists 
exalted above all the perfect.’ He [N.] hath revealed the Invisible and the perfect Triple-power.” 

In the Life of Plotinus, by r Porphyry (c. xiv.) , among the list of “Gnostics” against whose views on Matter the 
great coryphaeus of Later Platonism wrote one of the books of his Enneads (II. ix.), there is mention of Nikotheos in 
close connection with Zoroaster and others (S. 603 ffi). If we now turn to Schmidt’s Plotins Stellung zum 
Gnosticismus und kirchlichen Christentum (Leipzig, 1900), in which he has examined at length the matter of the 
treatise of Plotinus and the passage of Porphyry, we find him returning to the consideration of Nikotheos (pp. 58 
f£). Schmidt (p. 61) takes the “hidden Nikotheos” for a “heavenly being,” indeed as identical with the Alone- 
begotten, and as, therefore, the revealer of Himself. This Alone -begotten is the “Light-Darkness” of p. 13a of the 
“Untitled Apocalypse” of C. B. In other words, Nikotheos seems to be a synonym of the Triumphant Christos. See 
R. Liechtenhan, Die Offenbarung in Gnosticismus (Gottingen, 1901), p. 31. So far for the inner meaning; but is 
there possibly an outer one? As there was an apocalypse, for the words of Nikotheos are quoted, there was a seer, a 
prophet, a Christos, who had seen and handed on. It is somewhat remarkable that one of the by-names given to 
Jesus (jeschu) by Rabbinical theological controversy was Balaam (Bileam), meaning “Destroyer of the people.” Is 
there, then, any connection between Niko-theos on the one hand and Niko-laos (the Greek equivalent of Balaam) on 
the other? There are, at any rate, many other parallels in the Talmud jeschu-Stories of names of dishonour on the 
Rabbinical side equating with names of exalted honour on the Gnostic and Christian side. If so — dare we ask the 
question? — have we in the logos of Nikotheos a fragment from an “Apocalypse of Jesus”? 

Nay, may not Balaam-Niko-laos, — to take a lesson from the mystic word-play of the time, — “allegorically” have 
symbolized on the one hand the “victory of the many” (Xaog), and on the other the “Victor of the many,” for 
“people” in Philo signifies the “many” as opposed to the “one” “race” (ysvog) which sums up all His “limbs” in the 
Christ? 

695 tpcb?, — according to the accenting of R., but tpcbg would mean “Light.” 


- 156 - 



FROM THE BOOK OF THE CHALD/EANS 


1 3. 696 ‘When Ught-Man (Phos) was in Paradise, exspiring 697 under the 
l presence of] Fate, they 698 persuaded Him to clothe himself in the A dam 
they had made, the [Adam] of Fate, him of the four elements, — as though 
[they said] being free from [her 699 ] ills and free from their 700 activities. 

“And He, on account of this freedom from ills’ did not refuse; but they 
boasted as though He had been brought into servitude [to them]. ” 701 

14. For Hesiod said that the outer man was the “bond” 702 by which Zeus 
bound Prometheus. Subsequently, in addition to this bond, he sends him 
another, Pandora, 703 whom the Hebrews call Eve. For Prometheus and 
Epimetheus 704 are one Man, according to the system of allegory, — that is, 
Soul and Body. 


MAN THE MIND 

And at one time He 703 bears the likeness of soul, at another of mind, at 
another of flesh, owing to the imperfect attention which Epimetheus paid to 
the counsel of Prometheus, his own mind. 706 

15. For our Mind 707 saith: 

FRAGMENT XXVII. 

For that the Son of God having power in all things, becoming all things 
that he willeth, appeareth as he willeth to each. 708 


696 This is evidently a quotation. 

697 Reading SiaTtveopevo? with the Codd., and not SiaTtvsoftsvq) with R. This means “exhaling his light.” In the 
Egypto-Gnostic tradition underlying the Pistis Sophia, it is the function of the Rulers of the Fate to “squeeze out” the 
light from the souls and to devour it, or absorb it into themselves. 

698 The Rulers of the Fate. 

699 Sc. Fate’s. 

700 Sc. the Seven Rulers or Energies of the Fate-sphere, — avevegY 7 l TOV - 

701 This is evidently a quotation from a Greek translation of one of the Books of the Chaldasans (§§ 9, 10) in the 
Serapeum. It seems to me to be a “source” on which both the Hebrew and non-Hebrew Hellenists commentated in 
Alexandria. Thus both the commentator in S. and }. in the Naassene Document and the Poemandrists of the period 
would use it in common. 

702 Theog., 614. 

703 Cf. §§ 3 and 19. 

704 That is, Fore-thought and After-thought. 

705 Sc. Man. 

706 1 am almost persuaded that § 14 is also a quotation or summary and not the simple exegesis of Zosimus; the 
original being from the pen of some non-Hebrew Hellenistic allegorizer. 

707 That is, Poemandres, the Shepherd of men. 

708 Cf. § 7 above; evidently a quotation from the “Inner Door.” Compare also the logos quoted by S. (§ 8) in the 
Naassene Document from some Hellenistic scripture: “I become what I will, and am what I am.” Do Hermes and S. 
then both depend on the same scripture, in the form of an apocalypse; that is, does Hermes in his “expository 
sermon” depend on the direct teaching of the Mind to himself, which would be instruction in the first person? 


- 157 - 



16. Yea, unto the consummation of the cosmos will He come secretly , — 
nay, openly associating with His own, — counselling them secretly, yea 
through their minds, to settle their account with their Adam, the blind 
accuser, 709 in rivalry with the spiritual man of light! 10 

THE COUNTERFEIT DAIMON 

17. And these things come to pass until the Counterfeit Daimon 711 come, 
in rivalry with themselves, and wishing to lead them into error, declaring 
that he is Son of God, being form less in both soul and body. 

But they, becoming wiser from contemplation of Him who is truly Son of 
God, give unto him 712 his own Adam for death 713 , rescuing their oivn light 
spirits for [return to] their own regions where they were even before the 
cosmos [existed]. 714 . . . 

18. And [it is] the Hebrews alone and the Sacred Books of Hermes 
[which tell us] these things about the man of light and his Guide the Son of 
God, and about the earthy Adam and his Guide, the Counterfeit, who 
doth blasphemously call himself Son of God, for leading men astray! 15 

19. But the Greeks call the earthy Adam Epimetheus, who is counselled 
by his own mind, that is, his brother, not to receive the gifts of Zeus. 
Nevertheless being both deceived 716 and repenting 717 , and seeking the 
Blessed Eand. . . . 18 


709 xutpX'/iYOQO'UVTO?. The lexicons do not contain the word. It is probably a play on xaTy]YOQoi3vTO<;. Cf. note on “blind 
from birth” of C. in the Conclusion of Hippolytus in “Myth of Man” (vol. i. p. 189). 

710 That is, presumably, though in one aspect only, the soul that sees in the Light as opposed to the blind body. This 
passage reflects the same thought-atmosphere as that which surrounds the saying underlying Matt. v. 25 (= Lk. xii. 
57-59): “Agree with thine adversary quickly whiles thou art in the way with him, lest at any time the adversary deliver 
thee to the judge, and the judge to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. Amen, I say unto thee, thou shalt not 
come forth thence till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.” The third Evangelist, instead of the vague “agree,” 
preserves the technical terms aTtrjXXa/Oai, used of the discharge of a debt (cf. the technical xaTaXXayf|v sysiv of our 
text), and Tigaxxw q, an officer charged with the collection of taxes and debts. This Saying was interpreted by the 
Gnostics as having reference to the reincarnation of the soul into another body in order to discharge its karmic 
debts. 

711 6 avtifugo? Saifjuov. The term “counterfeit spirit” (avtipipov nveupa) occurs frequently in the Pistis Sophia. 

712 The Counterfeit Daimon. 

713 Or execution. 

714 The two last paragraphs are apparently also quoted or summarized from a Hellenistic commentary on a Book of 
the Hebrews, translated into Greek, and found in the libraries of the Ptolemies. It is remarkable that the contents of 
this book are precisely similar not only to the contents of the Books from which }. quotes in the Naassene 
Document, but also to the ideas about the Chaldasans which the commentator of S. sets forth. 

715 If we can rely on this statement of Zosimus, this proves that there was a developed Anthropos -doctrine also in 
the Trismegistic Books, as apart from the Chaldasan Books, — that is, that the Poemandrists did not take it from the 
Chaldtean Books, but had it from their own immediate line of tradition, namely, the Egyptian. 

716 Cf. 13 above. 

717 Lit. changing his mind. 

718 A lacuna occurs in the text. We could almost persuade ourselves that Zosimus had the text of S. and even the 
source of J. before him. For “Blessed Land,” if. § 7 above. 


- 158 - 



But Prometheus, that is the ?nind, interprets all things and gives good 
counsel in all things to them who have understanding and hearing But they 
who have only fleshly hearing are “processions of Fate. ” 

HIS ADVICE TO THEOSEBEIA 

To the foregoing we may append a version of Zosimus’ advice 719 to the lady 
Theosebeia, to which we have already referred, as offering an instructive 
counterpart to C. H., xiii. (xiv.). After a sally against the “false prophets,” through 
whom the daimones energize, not only requiring their offerings but also ruining 
their souls, Zosimus continues: 

“But be not thou, 0 lady, [thus] distracted, as, too, I bade thee in the 
actualizing [rites], and do not turn thyself about this way and that in 
seeking after God; but in thy house be still, and God shall come to thee, 

He who is everywhere and not in some wee spot as are daimonian things. 

“And having stilled thyself in body, still thou thyself in passions too — 
desire, [and] pleasure, rage [and] grief, and the tivelve fates 720 of Death. 

“And thus set straight and upright, call thou unto thyself Divinity; and 
truly shall He come, He who is everywhere and [yet] noivhere. 

“And [then], without invoking them, perform the sacred rites unto the 
daimones, — not such as offer things to them and soothe and nourish them, 
but such as turn them from thee and destroy their power, which 
Mambres 721 taught to Solomon, King of Jerusalem, and all that Solomon 
himself wrote down from his own wisdom. 

“And if thou shalt effectively perform these rites, thou shalt obtain the 
physical conditions of pure birth. And so continue till thou perfect thy soul 
completely. 

“And when thou knowest surely that thou art perfected in thyself, then 
spurn . . . from thee 722 the natural things of matter, and make for harbour 
in Pcemandres’ 723 arms, and having dowsed thyself within His Cup 724 , 
return again unto thy oivn [true] race”] 25 

This was how Zosimus understood the teaching of the Trismegistic tradition, for 
he had experienced it. 


719 Berth., p. 244; for a revised text see R. 214, n. 1. 

720 The twelve tormenting or avenging daimones of C. H., xiii. (xiv.). 

721 The famous Egyptian Theurgist and Magician who is fabled to have contended with Moses; while others say he 
was the instructor of Moses. 

722 The soul having now found itself wings and become the winged globe. 

723 ETti tov noifj.svav8ga (sic). 

724 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 4. 

725 Cf. C. H, i. 26, 29. 


- 159 - 



II. 

JAMBLICHUS 

ABAMMON THE TEACHER 

The evidence of Jamblichus 726 is of prime importance seeing that it was he who put 
the Later Platonic School, previously led by the purely philosophical Ammonius, 
Plotinus and Porphyry, into conscious touch with those centres of Gnosis into 
which he had been initiated, and instructed it especially in the Wisdom of Egypt in 
his remarkable treatise generally known by the title On the Mysteries. The authorship 
of this treatise is usually disputed; but as Proclus, who was in the direct tradition, 
attributes it to Jamblichus, the probabilities are in favour of its authenticity. 

Jamblichus writes with the authority of an accredited exponent of the Egyptian 
Wisdom as taught in these mysteries, and under the name of “Abammon, the 
Teacher,” proceeds to resolve the doubts and difficulties of the School with regard 
to the principles of the sacred science as formulated by Porphyry. Jamblichus 
begins his task with these significant words: 2 

HERMES THE INSPIRER 

“Hermes, the God who is our guide in [sacred] sermons, was rightly held of 
old as common to all priests. And seeing that it is he who has in charge the 
real science about the Gods, he is the same in all [our sacred sermons ]. 728 
And so it was to him that our ancestors attributed all the discoveries of 
their wisdom, attaching the name of Hermes to all the writings which had 
to do with such subjects. ' 29 And if we also enjoy that share of this God 
which has fallen to our lot, according to our ability [to receive him], thou 
dost well in submitting certain questions on theology to us priests, as thy 
friends, for their solution. And as I may fairly suppose that the letter sent 
to my disciple Anebo was written to myself I will send thee the true 
answers to the questions thou hast asked. For it would not be proper that 
Pythagoras and Plato, and Democritus and Eudoxus, and many others of 
the ancient Greeks 730 , should have obtained fitting instruction from the 


726 The exact date of Jamblichus is very conjectural. In my sketches of the “Lives of the Later Platonists” I have 
suggested about A.D. 255-330. See The Theosophical Review (Aug. 1896), xviii. 462, 463. 

727 I translate from the text of Parthey (Berlin, 1857). 

728 The term \byoq, is, of course, used technically, as a sacred or inspired sermon or course of instruction. 

729 ttavta xa oixeva auYYS«PP aT «. 

73,1 Parthey here adds the following interesting note: “The Egyptian teachers of Pythagoras were CEnuphis of On 
(Plut, De Is. et Os., 10) and Sonchis (Clem. Al., Strom., i. 15, 69); Plato was the pupil of Sechnuphis of On (Clem. Ic.) 
and of Chonuphis (Plut., De Gen. Socr., 578); Democritus was taught by Pammenes of Memphis (Georg. Sync., i. 471 
Dind.); Eudoxus by Chonuphis of Memphis (Plut. and Clem. //. «■.).” To this Parthey appends a list of some of the 
many other famous Greeks who owed their knowledge to Egyptian teachers, viz., Alcasus, Anaxagoras of 
Clazomena;, Appuleius, Archimedes, Bias, Chrysippus of Cnidus, Cleobulus, Datdalus, Decasneus, Diodorus Siculus, 
Ellopion, Euripides, Hecatasus of Abdera, Hecatatus of Miletus, Hellanicus, Herodotus, Homerus, Lycurgus, 
Melampus, Musatus, CEnopides of Chios, Orpheus, Pausanias, Pherecydes, Polybius, Simmias, Solon, Sphasrus, 


- 160 - 



recorders of the sacred science of their times, and that thou, our 
contemporary, who art of a like mind with these ancients, should lack 
guidance from the now living bearers of the title ‘ Common Teachers. ”’ 731 

From the above important passage we learn that among the Egyptians the books 
which dealt technically with the science of sacred things, and especially with the 
science of the Gods, that is to say, with the nature of the hierarchy from man 
upwards to the Supreme Ruler of our system, were regarded as “inspired.” The Ray 
of the Spiritual Sun which illumined the sacred science was distinguished as a 
Person, and this Person, because of a partial similarity of attributes, the Greeks had 
long identified with their God Hermes. He was “common” to the priests of the 
sacred science, that is to say, it was this special Ray of the Spiritual Sun which 
illumined their studies. Not, however, that all were equally illumined, for there were 
many grades in the mysteries, many steps up the holy ascent to union with Deity. 
Now the Rays of the Spiritual Sun are really One Light, “polarised” variously by the 
“spheres” of which we have heard so much in the Trismegistic treatises. These 
Rays come forth from the Logos, and each illuminates a certain division of the 
whole hierarchy of beings from the Logos to man, and characterises further the 
lower kingdoms, animals and plants, and minerals. Hence, for instance, among 
animals, we get the ibis, the ape and the dog as being especially sacred to Thoth or 
Hermes. 


THOSE OF THE HERMAIC NATURE 

Among men generally, also, there are certain whose characteristics are of a 
“Hermaic” 12 nature; the more evolved of these are adapted to certain lines of study 
and research, while again among those few of these who are beginning to be really 
conscious of the science of sacred tilings, that is to say, among the initiated 
students or priests, the direct influence of this Ray or Person begins to be 
consciously felt, by each, as Jamblichus says, according to his ability, for there are 
still many grades. 

Now the peculiar unanimity that prevailed in these strictly hierarchical schools of 
initiation, and the grand doctrine of identification that ran throughout the whole 
economy — whereby the pupil became identified with the master when he received 
his next grade of initiation, and whereby his master was to him the living symbol of 
all that was above that master, that is to say, was Hermes for him, in that he was 


Strabo, Telecles, Thales, Theodorus, Xenophanes of Colophon, Zamolxis. I have quoted this note on purpose to 
show the overpowering weight of evidence which some modern theorists have to face, in order to maintain their 
thesis that the philosophy of Greece was solely a native product. The universal testimony of the Greeks themselves 
is that all their greatest philosophers, geometricians, mathematicians, historians, geographers, and especially their 
theosophists, were pupils of the Egyptian Wisdom; the modern theory of the unaided evolution of philosophy on 
the soil of Greece, which is so universally accepted, is, to my mind, entirely erroneous. The “form” or “manner” of 
“philosophizing” was of course solely due to Greek genius, but the “matter” of it was of hoary antiquity. Cf. 
Plutarch, De Is. et Os., x. 

731 That is to say, presumably, teachers of all without distinction of race. Op. cit., i. 1. 

732 It is from this region of ideas that the terms “mercurial temperament,” and so forth, have reached modern times 
over the bridge of astrological tradition. 


- 161 - 




the messenger to him of the Word, and was the channel whereby the divine 
inspiration came to him — rendered the ascription to Hermes of all the sacred 
scriptures, such as the sermons of initiation, a very natural proceeding. It was not 
the case of a modern novel-writer taking out a copyright for his own precious 
productions, but simply of the recorder, scribe or copyist of the sacred science 
handing on the tradition. As long as this was confined to the disciplined schools of 
the sacred science it was without danger, but when irresponsible people began to 
copy a method, to whose discipline they refused to submit, for purposes of 
edification, and so appended the names of great teachers to their own lucubrations, 
they paved the way for that chaos of confusion in which we are at present 
stumbling. 


THE BOOKS OF HERMES 

Towards the end of his treatise Jamblichus, in treating of the question of the 
innumerable hierarchies of being and their sub -hierarchies, says that these are so 
multiplex that they had to be treated by the ancient priests from various aspects, 
and even among those who were “wise in great tilings” in his own time the 
teaching was not one and the same. 

“1 he main states of being were completely set forth by Hermes (in the 
twenty thousand books, as Seleucus 733 writes, or in the thirty -six thousand 
five hundred and twenty-five as Manetho relates), while the sub-states are 
interpreted in many other writings by the ancients, some of them sub- 
dividing 34 some of the sub-states and others others. ” 735 

At first sight it would seem that we are not to suppose that it took 20,000 volumes 
to set forth the main outlines of the cosmic system. Jamblichus would seem to mean 
that in the library or libraries of the books treating of the sacred science, the general 
scheme of the cosmos was set forth, and that the details were filled in very 
variously by many writers, each according to the small portion of the whole he had 
studied or speculated on. As to the number of books again we should not be 
dismayed, when we reflect that a book did not mean a large roll or volume but a 
division or chapter of such a roll. Thus we read of a single man composing no less 
than 6000 “books”! 

But on further reflection this view does not seem satisfactory. The ghost of the 
very precise number 36,525, which Jamblichus substitutes from Manetho for the 
vague total 20,000 of Seleucus, refuses to be laid by such a weak-kneed process. 

We see at once that 365-25 days is a very close approximation to the length of the 
solar year. We know further that 36,525 years was the sum of 25 Sothiac cycles 


733 Porphyry ( De Abs ., ii. c. 55) mentions a Seleucus whom he calls a “theologist”; Suidas says that Seleucus of 
Alexandria wrote a treatise On the Gods, in 100 books or chapters. 

734 Reading SiakafSovtsi; instead of 8ia(3akkovTS<;. 

735 Ibid., viii. 1. 


- 162 - 



(1461 x 25 = 36, 525) 736 , that most sacred time-period of the Egyptian secret 
astronomy, which was assigned to the revolution of the zodiac or the Great Year. 
Now supposing after all that Jamblichus does mean that Hermes actually did write 
the scheme of the cosmos in 36,525 “books” or “chapters”; and supposing further 
that these “chapters” were not written on papyrus, but in the heavens; and 
supposing still further that these “chapters” were simply so many great aspects of 
the real sun, just as the 365-25 days were but aspects of the physical sun — in such 
case the above favourite passage, which every previous writer has referred to actual 
books superscribed with the name of Hermes, and has dragged into every treatise 
on the Hermetic writings, will in future have to be removed from the list, and one 
of the functions of the real Hermes, the Initiator and Recorder, will become 
apparent to those who are “wise in greater things.” 

THE MONAD FROM THE ONE 

In the next chapter, after first speaking of the God over all, Jamblichus refers to the 
Logos, the God of our system, whom he calls “God of gods, the Monad from the 
One, prior to being and the source of being.” And then continues: 

‘For from Him cometh the essence of being and being ; wherefore is He 
called Father of being. For He is prior to being, the source of spiritual 
existences; wherefore also is He called Source of spiritual things. These 
latter are the most ancient sources of all things ; and Hermes places them 
before the csthereal and empyrean and celestial gods ; bequeathing to us a 
hundred books on the history of the empyrean , and a like number on that 
of the cethereal, but a thousand of them concerning the celestial, ” 737 

I am inclined to think that there is a mistake in the numbers of these books, and 
that we should have 10 assigned to the first class, 100 to the second, and 1000 to 
the third. In any case we see that all are multiples of the perfect number 10; and 
that thus my theory is still supported by the further information that Jamblichus 
gives us. 


THE TRADITION OF THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 

We next come to a passage which deals directly with our Trismegistic literature. 
Jamblichus tells Porphyry that with the explanations he has already given him, he 
will be able to find his way in the Hermetic writings which have come into his 
hands. 

‘For the books in circulation bearing the name of Hermes contain 
Hermaic doctrines, although they often use the language of the philosophers, 


736 See Georgius Syncellus, Chron., i. 97, ed. Dindorf. Also Eusebius, Chron., vi. 

737 Op. cit., viii. 2. 


- 163 - 



seeing that they were translated from the Egyptian by men well skilled in 
philosophy. ” 738 

The information given by Jamblichus is precise; they were translations, but instead 
of a literal rendering, the translators used the usual phraseology of the Greek 
philosophical writers. 

Jamblichus then goes on to say that physical astronomy and physical research 
generally were but a very small part of the Hermaic science, by no means the most 
important. 

For “the Egyptians deny that physics are everything ; on the contrary they 
distinguish both the life of the soul and the life of the mind from nature , 739 
not only in the case of the cosmos but also in man. They first posit Mind 
and Reason (Fogos) as having a being peculiar to themselves, and then they 
tell us that the world of becoming [or generation] is created. As Forefather 
of all beings in generation they place the Creator, and are acquainted with 
the Fife-giving Power which is prior to the celestial spaces and permeates 
them. Above the universe they place Pure Mind; this for the universe as a 
whole is one and undivided, but it is variously manifested in the several 
spheres . 740 And they do not speculate about these things with the unassisted 
reason, but they announce that by the divine art of their priestly science 741 
they reach higher and more universal states [of consciousness] above the 
[Seven Spheres of] Destiny, ascending to God the Creatorf 42 and that too 
without using any material tneans, or any other [material] assistance than 
the observation of a suitable opportunity. 

“It was Hermes who first taught this Path . 743 And Bitys, the prophet, 
translated [his teachings concerning it] for King Ammon f 44 discovering 
them in the inner temple 745 in an inscription in the sacred characters at 
Sals in Egypt. [From these writings it was that Bitys] handed on the 
tradition of the Name of God, as ‘That which pervadeth the whole 

• )>>746 

universe . 

“As to the Good Itself [the Egyptians] regard It in Its relation to the 
Divine as the God that transcends all thought, and in Its relation to man 


738 Ibid., viii. 4. 

739 That is, the life of the body. 

740 Lit. distributed to all the spheres as different. 

741 8ia ifp iega-uxfp 0eougY‘ a ?> — lit. by the theurgy known to the priests. 

742 The Mind in its creative aspect. 

743 Sc. This Way up to God. 

744 See Commentary on C. H. (xvi.). 

745 Or secret shrine. 

746 Op. tit., viii. 5. 


- 164 - 



as the at-onement ivith Him — a doctrine which Bitys translated from the 
Hermetic Books. ” 747 

From these two passages we learn that the ancient doctrine of Hermes concerning 
the Path, which is the keynote of our Trismegistic tracts, was to be found either in 
inscriptions in the sacred script in the secret chambers of the temples, into which 
no uninitiated person was ever permitted to enter, or in “books,” also in the sacred 
script; that these had never been translated until the reign of King Ammon. 48 But 
what are we to understand by translated? Into Greek? Not necessarily, but more 
probably interpreted from the hieroglyphic symbols into the Egyptian vernacular 
and written in the demotic character. The term used (8ispjxr]vsusiv) clearly bears this 
sense; whereas if translation from Egyptian into Greek had been intended, we 
should presumably have had the same word (jisTccypocpsiv) employed which 
Jamblichus uses when speaking of the Hermetic books that had been read by 
Porphyry. Reitzenstein (p. 108), however, has apparently no doubt that the writings 
of Bitys were in Greek, and that these writings lay before Jamblichus and were the 
only source of his information. But I cannot be certain that this is the meaning of 
the Greek. 

We have rather, according to my view, probably two strata of “translation” — from 
hieroglyphic into demotic, from demotic into Greek. As to Bitys, we know nothing 
more definite than Jamblichus tells us. Perhaps he was the first to translate from 
the sacred hieroglyphs into the vulgar tongue and script; and by that we mean the 
first to break the ancient rule and write down in the vulgar characters those holy 
sermons and treatises which previously had never before been inscribed in any but 
the most sacred characters. We are not, however, to suppose that Bitys was the 
only one to do this. 

Now in our Trismegistic literature we have a deposit addressed to a King Ammon. 
Is it then possible that this King, whoever he was, was the initiator of a change of 
policy in the immemorial practice of the priests? It may be so, but at present we 
have not sufficient data to decide the point. 

BITYS 

A further scrap of information concerning Bitys, however, may be gleaned from 
Zosimus (§ 8), when, speaking of the Logos, the Son of God, pouring His Light 
into the soul and starting it on its Return Above, to the Blessed Region where it 
was before it had become corporeal (as described in the Trismegistic tractate, 
entitled “Concerning the Inner Door”) — he writes: 

“And there shall it see the Picture (mvap) that both Bitos hath described, 
and thrice-greatest Plato, and ten-thousand-times-great Hermes, — for 


747 Ibid., X. 7. 

748 Identified by some writers with one of the last kings of the Saitic dynasty (the xxvith), who reigned somewhere 
about 570 B.C. See Thomas Taylor, lamblichus on the Mysteries, p. 306 n. (2nd ed., London, 1895). But as there is no 
objective evidence by which this identification can be controlled, we simply record it. 


- 165 - 



Thoythos translated it into the first sacred tongue, — Thoth the First 
Man. ” 749 

The identity of Bitys and Bitos is thus unquestionable. 71 " Reitzenstein, however, 
asserts that neither of these name-forms is Egyptian, and therefore approves of the 
identification of our Bitys with “Pitys the Thessalian” of the Papyri, 751 as Dieterich 
has suggested. The headings of the fragments of the writings of Pitys in the Papyri 
run: “The Way [or Method] of Pitys”; “Pitys to King Ostanes Greeting”; “The Way 
of Pitys the King”; “Of Pitys the Thessalian.” 

From this Reitzenstein (n. 2) concludes that already in the second and third 
centuries (? A.D.) Pitys is included among the prophetical theologi and Magians. 
What the precise date of these Papyri may be it is not easy to determine, but, 
whether or not they belong to the second and third centuries, it is evident that Pitys 
was regarded as ancient and a contemporary of the Magian Sage Ostanes. 

King, 752 referring to a passage of the Elder Pliny (Nat. Hist., xxx. 4), which remarks 
on the similarity of the Magian Gnosis with the Druidical Gnosis of Gaul and 
Britain, says: “Pliny by Inis Magica’ understands the rites instituted by Zoroaster, 
and first promulgated by Osthanes to the outer world, this Osthanes having been 
‘military chaplain’ to Xerxes during Inis expedition to Greece.” 

This date, if we can rely upon it, would take us back to the Persian Conquest of 
Egypt, but what has a Thessalian Pitys to do with that? 

Curiously enough also Pliny in his xxviiith Book makes use of the writings of a 
certain Bithus of Dyrrachium, a city on the coast of Illyricum in the Ionic Gulf, 
known in Grecian history as Epidamnus. 

All of this is puzzling enough; but whatever conclusions may be drawn from the 
evidence, the clearest indication is that Bitys was ancient, and therefore that 
whatever translating or rather “interpreting” there may have been, it was probably 
from hieroglyphic into demotic, and the latter was subsequently further 
“interpreted” into Greek. 


OSTANES-ASCLEPIUS 

But is Ostanes the Magian Sage of tradition, or may we adopt the brilliant 
conclusion of Maspero, and equate Ostanes with Asclepius, and so place him in the 
same circle with Bitys, or rather see in Bitys an “Asclepius”? 

At any rate the following interesting paragraph of Granger ' 1 ’ deserves our closest 
attention in this connection, when he writes: 


749 See notes appended to the extract from Zosimus. 

750 As has already been supposed by Hoffmann and Riess in Pauly- Wissowa’s Realengklopddie, i. 1347. R. 108. 

751 Dieterich, ]ahr. f. Phil, Suppl., xvi. 753; Wessely, Denkschr. d. K. K. Akad. (1888), pp. 92, 95, 98. 

752 King (C. W.), The Gnostics and their Remains, 2nd ed. (London, 1887), p. 421, who, however, does not document his 
statement. 

753 Granger (F.), “The Poemander of Hermes Trismegistus,” in The Journal of Theological Studies, vol. v., no. 19, ap. 
1904 (London), p. 398. 


- 166 - 



“Maspero, following Goodwin, has shown that Ostanes is the name of a 
deity who belongs to the cycle of Thoth . 754 His name, Ysdnw, was derived 
by the Egyptians themselves from a verb meaning ‘to distinguish’ and he 
was a patron of intellectual perception. As time went on, he gained in 
importance. Under the Ptolemies he was often represented upon the Temple 
walls In Pliny he appears as an early writer upon medicine . 755 Some 
of the prescriptions quoted as from him are quite in the Egyptian style . 756 
Philo Byblius, on whom, to be sure, not much reliance can be placed , 757 
mentions a book of Ostanes — the Octateuch. It is tempting to 
identify this with some such collection as the six medical books which 
occupy the last place in Clement’s list 759 Noiv Pliny, as appears from his 
list of authorities, does not quote Ostanes directly. If we note that 
Democritus is /mentioned by Pliny in the same context, and that Ostanes is 
the legendary teacher of Democritus upon his journey to Egypt, we shall 
consider it at least probable that Pliny depends upon Democritus for his 
mention of Ostanes. The Philosopher, whose visit to Egypt may be regarded 
as a historical fact, would in that case be dealing with a medical collection 
which passes under the name of Ostanes. Asclepius, who appears in the 
Pcemander, will be the Greek equivalent of Ostanes. Thus the 
collocation of Hermes and Asclepius is analogous to the kinship of the 
Egyptian deities, Thoth and Ysdnw. ” 

FROM THE HERMAIC WRITINGS 

That these Bitys-books contained the same doctrines as our Trismegistic writings is 
evident from the whole treatise of Jamblichus. Jamblichus throughout bases 
himself upon the doctrines of Hermes, 76 " and clearly suggests that he does not owe 
his information to translations only, as was the case with Porphyry, but to records 
in Egyptian; but whether to the demotic treatises of the Bitys-school or to the 
heiroglyphic records themselves he does not say. That these doctrines were 
identical with the teachings in our Trismegistic literature requires no proof to any 
one who has read our treatises and the exposition of Jamblichus; for the benefit, 
however, of those who have not read Jamblichus , 761 we append a passage to show 


754 Prof. Soc. Bib/. Arch., xx. 142. 

755 Nat. Hist., xxviii. 6. 

756 P. S. B. A., ibid., 256, 261. 

757 He, however, was very well placed to have accurate knowledge on such a point. — [G. R. S. M.] 

758 Eus., Prop. Ev., I. x. 52. 

759 Strom., VI. iv. 37. 

760 Especially in Book VIII., which is entirely devoted to an exposition of Hermalc doctrine, and ought perhaps to be 
here translated in full. I have, however, preferred to select the passages definitely characterized by Jamblichus as 
Hermaic. 

761 Who must be read in the original and not in the inelegant and puzzling version of Taylor, the only English 
translation. 


- 167 - 



the striking similarity of ideas. Treating of the question of freewill and necessity 
raised by Porphyry, and replying to the objection that the Egyptians taught an 
astrological fatalism, Jamb lichus writes: 

‘We must explain to you how the question stands by some further 
conceptions drawn from the Hermaic writings. Man has two souls, as these 
writings say. The one is from the First Mind, and partakes also of the 
Tower of the Creator f 62 while the other, the soul under constraint, comes 
from the revolution of the celestial [Spheres] 763 ; into the latter the former, 
the soul that is the Seer of God, insinuates itself at a later period. This 
then being so, the soul that descends into us from the worlds 764 keeps time 
with the circuits of these worlds, while the soul from the Mind, existing in 
us in a spiritual fashion, is free from the whirl of Generation; by this the 
bonds of Destiny are burst asunder; by this the Path up to the spiritual 
Gods is brought to birth; by such a life as this is that Great Art Divine, 
which leads us up to That beyond the Spheres of Genesis , 765 brought to its 
consummation. ” 766 


THE COSMIC SPHERES 

With regard to the nature of these Spheres, Jamb lichus shows very clearly that they 
are not the physical planets, as may be seen from the following passages of his De 
Mysteriis : 

‘With regard to partial existences, then, I mean in the case of the soul in 
partial manifestation , 767 we must admit something of the kind we have 
above. For just such a life as the [human] soul emanated before it entered 
into a human body, and just such a type as it made ready for itself, just 
such a body, to use as an instrument, does it have attached to it, and just 
such a corresponding nature accompanies [this body] and receives the more 
pefect life the soul pours into it. Tut with regard to superior existences and 
those that surround the Source of All as pefect existences, the inferior are 
set within the superior, bodies in bodiless existences, things made in their 
makers; and the former are kept in position by the latter enclosing them in 
a sphere. 


762 The Second Mind according to “The Shepherd.” 

763 The Seven Spheres of the Harmony. 

764 The Seven Spheres. 

765 tiqoq to aysvvt]Tov. 

766 Op. cit viii. 6. 

767 That is, as an individual soul and not as the world-soul. 


- 168 - 



“ The revolutions of the heavenly Bodies / 68 therefore, being from the first set 
in the celestial revolutions of the (Ethereal Soul / 69 for ever continue in this 
relationship; while the Souls of the [invisible] Worlds / 70 extending to their 
[common] Mind, are completely surrounded by it, and from the beginning 
have their birth in it. And Mind in like manner, both partially and as a 
whole, is also contained in superio r states of existence. ” 771 

And again in another passage Jamb lichus writes: 

“We say that [the Spiritual Sun and Moon, and the rest] are so far from 
being contained within their Bodies, that on the contrary, it is they who 
contain these Bodies of theirs within the Spheres of their own vitality and 
energy. And so far are they from tending towards their Bodies, that the 
tendency of these very Bodies is towards their Divine Cause. Moreover, their 
Bodies do not impede the perfection of their Spiritual and Incorporeal 
Nature or disturb it by being situated in it. ” 772 

To this we may add what Proclus writes in his Commentary on the 7 'imams of Plato: 

“Each of the [Seven] Vianet ary Spheres is a complete World containing a 
number of divine offspring which are invisible to us, and over all of these 
Spheres the Sta / 73 we see is the Bailer. Now Fixed Stars differ from 
those 774 in the Vlanetary Spheres in that the former have but one Monad, 
namely, their system as a whole 77 ; while the latter, namely the invisible 
globes in each of the Vlanetary Spheres, which globes have an orbit of their 
own determined by the revolution of their respective Spheres, have a double 
Monad — namely, their system as a whole / 76 and that dominant 
characteristic which has been evolved by selection in the several spheres of the 
system. For since globes are secondary to Fixed Stars they require a double 
order of government, first subordination to their system as a whole, and 
then subordination to their respective spheres . 777 And that in each of these 
spheres there is a host 778 on the same level 779 with each, you may infer from 
the extremes . 780 For if the Fixed Sphere 781 has a host on the same level as 


768 Physical planets. 

769 Of all of our visible system? 

770 That is to say, the seven spheres. 

771 Op. cit., i. 8. 

772 Ibid., i. 17. 

773 That is, visible planet. 

774 That is, perhaps, the invisible globes. 

775 Lit. their wholeness. 

776 In our case the whole solar system. 

777 Or, as one would say in modern Theosophical terms, to their planetary chains. 

778 Hierarchy. 

779 abaTOiypv. 

78,1 That is to say, we may infer from the fixed stars (or suns) and from the globes which we can see ( i.e . the visible 
planets), the manner of those we cannot see. 


- 169 - 



itself, and Earth has a host of earthy animals, 782 just as the former a host 
of heavenly animals f 83 it is necessary that every whole 784 should have a 
number of animals on the same level with itself indeed it is because of the 
latter fact that they are called wholes. The intermediate levels, however, are 
outside the range of our senses, the extremes only being visible, the one 
through the transcendent brilliance of its nature, the other through its 
kinship with ourselves. ” 785 

It is evident that we are here dealing with what are known to Theosophical students 
as the “planetary chains” of our system, and that therefore these Spheres are not 
the physical planets; the visible planets are but a very small portion of the globes of 
these chains, of some of which there are no globes at all visible. The ascription 
therefore of the “influence” of these Spheres to the sun, moon, and five of the 
visible planets is at best a makeshift, a “correspondence,” or a “symbolism.” 

III. 

JULIAN THE EMPEROR 786 

Text: ap. Cyril, Contra Julianum, v. 176; Migne, col. 770 A. See also Neumann 
(C. I.), Juliani Imperatoris Tibrorum contra Christian os qua super sunt (Teipgig 
1880), p. 193. 787 


THE DISCIPLES OF WISDOM 

That God, however, has not cared for the Hebrews only, [but rather] that 
in His love for all nations He hath bestowed on them [sc. the Hebrews] 
nothing worth very serious attention, whereas He has given us far greater 
and superior gifts, consider from what will follow. The Egyptians, counting 
up of their own race the names of not a few sages, can also say they have 
had many who have followed in the steps 788 of Hermes. I mean of the Third 
Hermes who used to come doivn 789 [to them] in Egypt. The Chaldceans 
[also can tell of] the [disciples] of Oannes and of Telus; and the Greeks of 


781 The sphere of fixed stars or suns. 

782 That is to say, all the visible globes ( vulgo planets) of our system as a whole. An “animal” means a “ living thing”; so 
that here “earthy animals” mean the living vehicles of the heavenly beings which we so erroneously call “heavenly 
bodies.” 

783 That is to say, suns or solar systems. 

784 Here whole means plane. 

785 That is to say, the brilliant light of the suns in space, and the reflected light of the physical globes of the planetary 
spheres of our system. See Proclus, Commentarius in Platonis Timaum , Bk. iv., p. 279 D, E, p. 676, ed. Schneider 
(Vratislavia;, 1847). The passage is very difficult to translate because of its technical nature. Taylor, in his translation 
(London, 1820, ii. 281, 282), misses nearly every point. 

786 Julian the Emperor reigned 360-363 A.D. It was during the last year of his reign that he wrote Contra Christianos. 

787 Also Taylor (Thomas), The Arguments of the Emperor Julian against the Christians (London, 1809), p. 36. 

788 Lit. “from the succession” (SiaSo^rii;). 

789 ETUtpoiTipavTO?, — “to come habitually to”; E7mpoltr]ai? is used of the “coming upon one,” or inspiration of a God. 


- 170 - 



tens of thousands [who have the Wisdom] from Che iron. 7 90 For it is from 
him that they derived their initiation into the mysteries of nature, and their 
knowledge of divine things; so that indeed [in comparison] the Hebrews 
seem only to give themselves airs about their own [attainments]. 

Here we learn from Julian that the Third Hermes, the Hermes presumably of our 
Sermons, was known, by those initiated into the Gnosis, to be no physical historical 
Teacher, but a Teaching Power or Person, who taught from within spiritually. 

IV. 

FULGENTIUS THE MYTH O GRAPHER 791 

An intermediate of the parent copy of our Corpus in every probability lay before 
Fulgentius. Thus we find him (p. 26, 18 H 792 ) referring to the first sermon, though 
barbarously enough, in the phrase: “ Hermes in Opinandre libroP and quoting from the 
introductory words; he also quotes (p. 88, 3) some words from C. H., xii. (xiii.), 
stupidly referring them to Plato, adding in Greek: 

FRAGMENT XXVIII. 

The human mind is god; if it be good, God [then] doth shower His benefits 
[ upon us]. 

And twice (p. 85, 21, and p. 74, 11) Fulgentius refers in all probability to the lost 
ending of “The Definitions of Asclepius,” in the latter passage telling us, “as 
Hermes Trismegistus says,” that there were three kinds of music, — namely 
“ adomenon, psallomenon, aulumenonP — that is, singing, harping, and piping. 


790 Partially quoted by Reitzenstein (p. 175, n. 1). 

791 The date of this Afro-Latin writer cannot be later than the sixth century. 

792 Helm (R.), Fabii Planciadis Fnlgentii V. C. Opera (Leipzig, 1898). 


- 171 - 



IV 

Conclusion 



AN ATTEMPT AT CLASSIFYING THE EXTANT LITERATURE 

EFORE we proceed to append our concluding remarks, it will be as 
well to set down some attempt at classifying our extant sermons and 
fragments. Unfortunately, however, this cannot be done in any 
scientific manner, owing to the fact that the literature, even were it 
fully before us, would be found to be too chaotic. Indeed, even with 
our fragmentary information concerning it, we are acquainted with no less than 
four unrelated Corpora — those that lay before Lactantius, Cyril, and Stobasus, and 
our own imperfect Corpus of Byzantine tradition. There must also have been other 
Corpora or collections, as, for instance, the books that Jamblichus used, not to 
mention the ancient body of MSS. which lay before Petosiris and Nechepso. 

OF HERMES 

First and foremost, standing in a class by itself, must be placed: 

C. H. i . — “ The Vamandres. ” 

This is the fundamental Gospel of the School, the Self-instruction of the Hermes- 
or Master-grade. 

With it, as based upon it in general type, though not in form, must be taken: 

C. H. xi. (xii .). — “Mind unto Hermes. ” 

This is of later date, but still it must have been comparatively early, for it introduces 
the /Ron-doctrine, which must be early, and is the esoteric instruction on the 
doctrines laid down in C. H. iv. (v.) — “The Cup” — which was perhaps regarded as 
the most important sermon after “The Poemandres.” 

Of the lost early literature we can get no clear indication; it may, however, be 
mentioned that the “Sayings of Agathodaimon” referred to in the Tat Sermon, C. 
H. xii. (xiii.), probably belonged to the most archaic deposit of the Trismegistic 
literature, and may be compared with the “Sayings of Ammon” mentioned by 
Justin Martyr. These belonged, presumably, originally solely to the Hermes-grade. 



- 172 - 




With the same type as the conclusion of the “Poemandres” in its present form, that 
is to say with a later development, we must classify: 

C. H. in. (iv .). — “The Sacred Sermon”; and 
C. H. vii. (viii ). — ‘Whither stumble ye. ” 

Here also, for lack of a more satisfactory heading, we must place: 

Ex. xxii . — “An Apophthegm of Hermes. ” 

Ex. xxiv . — “A Hymn of the Gods. ” 

Frag. xxvi. — From ‘The Inner Door. ” 

Frag, xxvii — ‘For Our Mind saith. ” 

The last being probably from one of the oldest deposits of the literature. 

The next most convenient heading for classification is that under which we can 
place the greatest number of pieces, namely: 

TO TAT 

We know that the Tat-instruction was divided into (a) “The General Sermons,” of 
which C. H. x. (xi.) — “The Key” — is said to be the epitome or rather summation; 
and (b) “The Expository Sermons,” of which C. H. xiii. (xiv.) — “The Secret 
Sermon on die Mountain” — was the consummation. 

It is, of course, not certain whether the Tat Sermons were divided simply into these 
two classes, for though we are certain in a number of instances that we are dealing 
with an extract from an Expository Sermon, we are often in doubt when the 
heading is only “From the Sermon,” or “Sermons to Tat,” how to classify it. We do 
not know how many General Sermons there may have been, or whether they were 
divided into Books as were the Expository Sermons and the “To Asclepius,” at 
anyrate in the Corpus of Cyril. For convenience of classification, however, we may 
consider, though perfectly arbitrarily, that all the sermons and fragments which 
cannot fall under the heading of “Expository” may be treated as “General.” 

The General Sermons 

C. H. (ii .). — ‘The General Sermon .” 795 

C. H. viii (ix .). — ‘That No One of Existing Things do Perish. ” 

Ex. x . — “Concerning the Pule of Providence. ” 794 

Ex. xi . — “Of Justice .” 795 

Ex. xx . — ‘The Poiver of Choice. ” 

Fragg. vi and vii. 

C. H. x. (xi . ). — ‘The Key. ” 


793 The text has bodily fallen out of our Corpus with one of the quires. 

794 This seems to be a complete sermon, and to be presupposed in C. H. xii. (xiii.); as also Ex. xi. 

795 Exx. x.-xiii. probably go here as being part of the “Sermons on Fate to Tat”; but they are assigned otherwise by 
Stobteus. 


- 173 - 



This last is stated to be the epitome or summation of “The General Sermons.” It is 
addressed to both Asclepius and Tat, and is to be taken in connection with “The 
Perfect Sermon.” 


The Expository Sermons 

Of these there were in the Corpus of Cyril three Books — to the First of which are 
assigned: 

Fragg. xx. (?), xxii., xxiii., xxiv. 

Ex. ii. and Fragg. in., xi., xii., xv . 796 

To be assigned to “The Expository Sermons” in general without any clearer 
indications: 

Exx. Hi. (?). — “Of Truth. ” 797 
Ex. iv . 798 ' 

Exx. v., vi., vn., mil., ix. 

Ex. i. — “Of Piety and True Philosophy. ” 800 

From the Corpus Hermeticum we may conjecturally assign the following to this 
class: 

C. H. iv. (v .). — ‘The Cup .” 801 
C. H. v. (vi . ). — ‘Though Manifest. ” 

C. FI. vii. (viii . ). — “About the Common Mind. ” 802 

Finally, the whole course of these “Expository Sermons” is consummated by what 
we may call “The Initiation of Tat”: 

C. H. xiii. (xiv .). — ‘The Secret Sermon on the Mountain. ” 

We next pass on to what Cyril calls the “To Asclepius,” of which, as of “The 
Expository Sermons, diere were in his Corpus at least Three Books. 

TO ASCLEPIUS 

In our Corpus Hermeticum the following are assigned to Asclepius: 

C. H. ii. (Hi.). “An Introduction to the Gnosis of the Nature of All Things. ” 

C. H. vi. (vii .). — Tn God Alone is Good. ” 


796 These all seem to go together from the same Sermon or Book, which in the case of Frag. xv. is definitely assigned 
by Cyril to the “First of the Expository Sermons.” The beginning of the Sermon is given in Lact. xxiv., and a 
reference in Lact. xiii. 

797 Seems to be a complete tractate. 

798 By comparison with Ex. vii. 

799 Ex. ix. is characterised as “the most authoritative and chiefest of them all,” and therefore came, presumably, at the 
end of one of the Books of these Sermons. 

800 A complete tractate, containing heads or summaries of previous sermons, and probably one towards the end of 
this collection. 

801 The esoteric counterpart of which is C. FI. xi. (xii.). 

802 These three sermons are too advanced to be classed among “The General Sermons,” and in the case of the last, 
Tat is a questioner and not a hearer as he indubitably was in the introductory instmction. 


- 174 - 



C. H. ix. (x . ). — “About Sense. ”803 

C. H. xiv. (xv .). — “A Letter to Asclepius. ”804 

From the “To Asclepius” in Cyril’s collection we have: 

Frag. xxv. (?). 

And definitely from the Third “To Asclepius”: 

Fragg. xvi.-xviii. 

In this Third Book it is probable that “The Perfect Sermon” was included in Cyril’s 
Corpus. This sermon, which is the longest we possess, was evidently originally 
addressed to Asclepius alone, for its alternative title is par excellence “The Asclepius,” 
and my conjecture that the introduction of the “holy three” — Asclepius, Tat and 
Ammon — is due to a later editor, is amply borne out by all the evidence. We may 
thus well conclude our list with: 

“The Perfect Sermon. ” 

For the fragments of the lost Greek original of this important tractate, see 
Lactantius: 

Fragg. v., viii., ix., x. 

This Sermon is to be taken in close connection with “The Key” which sums up 
“The General Sermons” to Tat. 


TO AMMON 

Stobasus ascribes eight of his extracts to a Book or Books of his collection entitled 
“To Ammon.” These excerpts, however, would seem to be more appropriately 
classified under “Sermons to Tat.” As, however, Johannes distinctly so describes 
them, we will append them here. 

/ — < v'Y'’ 'V’77 'V'V 77 

J — J%/\%/\% v\l/l/l/% 

Exx. xiv. -xix . — “Of Soul, ” i. -vi. 

Exx. xvi.-xix. follow one another in the text of the Excerpts by Stobaeus; as Ex. 
xviii., however, refers to “The General Sermons,” it therefore would make us 
suppose that either we are here dealing with “The Expository Sermons” to Tat, or 
that the Ammon-grade had already had communicated to them “The General 
Sermons.” 

The above are the four types of Trismegistic Sermons proper, and we next turn to 
the writings of the Disciples of Hermes. 


803 This is said to follow on “The Perfect Sermon,” which was not included in our Corpus among the selections of 
the Poemandrist apologist who redacted it. 

804 This is said by the editor to be an expansion of an instruction already given to Tat, in Asclepius’ absence, and the 
doctrine is very similar to that contained in C. H. xi. (xii.) — “Mind unto Hermes.” It also stood in Cyril’s (viii.) “To 
Asclepius.” 


- 175 - 



OF ASCLEPIUS 


It is remarkable that Asclepius, the most learned of the Three, writes his treatises 
and letters, not to philosophers or priests, or students, nor yet to his younger 
brother Tat — but invariably to the King or to Kings. He invariably writes to 
“Ammon”; and the once existing literature of this class was a very rich one, if we 
can believe the writer or redactor of C. H. (xvi.). The fragments that remain, 
however, are by no means numerous, and include: 

C. H. (xvi ). — ‘The Definitions oj 'Asclepius . ” 805 
Frag. iv. — Probably from the lost ending of above. 

C. H. (xvii). — “Of Asclepius to the King . ” 806 

Ex. xxi. (?) — which may, perhaps, be more correctly headed “Of Asclepius to the 
King ” instead of with Stobceus “Of Isis to Horus. ” 

To neither Tat nor Ammon are tractates assigned; for when Tat is perfected he 
becomes in his turn Hermes, and so writes as Hermes, while Ammon is the man of 
action and affairs who does not teach. May we further from these phenomena 
conclude that “Asclepius” was the man who was skilled in theory and intellectual 
grasp, but was not capable of direct illumination as was Tat? 

The next class of literature falls under the heading: 

OF ISIS 

Whether or not the forms of this literature which we possess are contemporaneous 
with or later than the Tat and Asclepius Sermons, we cannot say; but in any case 
they are based on ancient types — the “Books of Isis to Horus.” To this type we 
assign: 

Ex. xxi . — “Of Isis to Horus. ” 

Though, as we have suggested above, this is an error of Johannes, and should be 
rather “Of Asclepius to the King.” 

Ex. xxiii . — ‘From Aphrodite. ” 

Where Aphrodite probably equates with Isis. 

Exx. xxv., xxvi . — ‘The Virgin of the World. ” 

Ex. xxvii . — ‘From the Sermon of Isis to Horus. ” 

The remaining class of literature is connected widi the name of Osiris as the 
Disciple of Agathodaimon, the Thrice-greatest, and may be headed as: 

FROM THE AGATHODAIMON LITERATURE 

Our fragments are all taken from Cyril’s Corpus, and are referred to by him under 
the heading “To Asclepius.” We have, however, not included them under this 


805 The end is lost. 

806 a fragment only from the end of the sermon is preserved. 


- 176 - 



heading in our tentative classification, because they are plainly not addressed to 
Asclepius, but belong to a quite different form of literature, most probably 
throwing back to an ancient type of the same nature as the “Books of Isis.” To this 
class are to be assigned: 

Fragg. xiii, xiv., xix., xxi. 

This form may be perhaps more appropriately taken with the “Sayings of 
Agathodaimon” and the “Sayings of Ammon” as Agathodaimon; both of which 
pertain to the oldest types of the Trismegistic literature. 

Finally, we add the appendix to our Corpus written by a Poemandrist rhetor and 
apologist: 

C. H. (xviii . ). — “The Encomium of Kings. ” This may be taken with the quotation 
from the editor of Cyril's Corpus of XV. Books. 

And so we come to the end of our tentative classification; with the full conviction, 
however, that as no one at the time when the literature was extant in a number of 
Corpora and collections of all sorts attempted to classify it, so now that we have 
only the flotsam and jetsam of this once abundantly rich cargo before us, no 
inventory can be made that is of the slightest scientific value, and we can at best 
offer the reader a few sorted heaps of disjecta membra of varying dates. 

OF JUDGMENTS OF VALUE 

We now approach the conclusion of our task, but with the feeling that the whole 
matter should be put aside for years before any attempt be made to set down any 
judgments of value. We are as yet too much involved in a maze of details to be able 
to extricate ourselves into the clear space in which we can walk at ease round the 
labyrinth and view it from a general and detached point of view. 

Nevertheless, we will endeavour to set down some general impressions of our 
experiences in the labyrinth — of the many windings we have had to traverse, and 
the many places with no way out into which we have been led by following the 
paths of history and criticism; out of which there has been time and again no 
egress, even when holding fast to the thread of light woven out of the illuminating 
rays of the doctrines of the tradition. 

It is indeed a difficult task to stand with the feet of the mind set firm on the surface 
of objectivity, and with the head and heart of it in the heights and depths of the 
subjective and unmanifest. And yet this almost superhuman task is the Great Work 
set before every scholar of the Gnosis — the man who would think truly and judge 
justly, viewing the matter from all standpoints, and appraising it from without and 
within, from above and below, endeavouring to unite centre and circumference in a 
blended intuitional sense that transcends our divided senses and intellect. 

The Trismegistic literature is scripture, and to its understanding we must bring all 
and every faculty that the best minds of to-day are bringing to bear upon the special 


- 177 - 



scripture which each one may believe to be the most precious legacy from the Past 
to the Present. 

Now the application of what is called “criticism” to scripture is the wielding of a 
two-edged sword; this sword is not only two-edged, but it is fiery. If it is righdy 
used, it will disperse the hosts of error and hew a path into the Paradise of Truth; 
but if it is wrongly used, it will react on the daring soul that attempts to grasp it, 
and he will find in it the flaming brand in the hands of the Angel-Warden that 
keeps him from the Gate of Heaven. 

Criticism, which is regarded with such fear and trembling by some, and is sneered 
at and despised by others, is the sword that the Christ has brought on earth in these 
latter days. There is now war in the members of the faithful, war within them, such 
war as they cannot escape, if God has given them a mind with which to reason. 
Every man of intelligence who loves his own special scripture, is keenly aware of 
the war within his members — head against heart and heart against head, form 
against substance and substance against form. This is keenly felt by those who love 
their own special Bible; but how few can enter into the feelings of another who 
loves with equal fervour some other Bible? Who can be really fair to any other 
man’s religion? And by this we do not mean an absolutely lifeless indifference, in 
which the head alone is concerned — for there are not a few men of this type who 
deal with the comparative science of religion — but a lively sympathy that knows 
that the other man’s religion is the highest thing on earth for him, and the light- 
giving revelation of God’s Wisdom. 

THE SONS OF GOD 

In treating of the “Religion of the Mind,” of the Gnosis of Thrice-greatest Hermes, 
I have endeavoured to enter into it as I conceive the Disciples of that Way entered 
into it, with love and reverence. I would do the same with any other of the Great 
Religions of Humanity (and have done so in some cases), if I desired fervendy, all 
prejudices and predilections apart, I will not say, to understand it — for what mortal 
mind can grasp the Divine Revelation in any of its Great Forms? — but to share, 
however imperfectly, in its illumination. Now, this attitude of mind and love of 
God and man is strongly deprecated by those who fear to stand accused of lack of 
loyalty to their own particular form of that Great Form of Faith which God has 
given for their guidance. The one object of their enquiries into other Great Forms 
of Faith is to “prove” that their own small form of the Great Form to which they 
give allegiance, is the end of all ends, and the highest of all heights, and that the 
other countless forms are of the Enemy of their God. My God, or rather God, for 
He is the Father of all, has no enemies; He has many sons, all brethren, and loves 
them equally even though they refuse to believe Him. There is but one Religion, its 
Great Forms are many, the forms of these Forms are innumerable, as many as are 
the individual minds and hearts of men, and the many hearts and minds of 
individual man. 


- 178 - 



And here I would set forth my present all-insufficient notion of the Great Form of 
Religion known as Christianity, for there will doubtless be some who read these 
volumes who will accuse me of I know not what attitude other than that of their 
own to that Faith. 

My faith in the Master of Christendom is unbounded; I dare not limit it or qualify 
it — for that Master is for me the Mind of all master-hood, Poemandres Himself. 
For how can any small mind of man dare to limit the Illimitable, the Mystery of all 
mysteries, that enfolded Jesus the Christ, and Gautama the Buddha, and Zoroaster 
the Mage, and Lao-tze the Sage, and Orpheus the Bard, and Pythagoras the 
Philosopher, and Hermes the Gnostic, and all and every Master and Master of 
masters? Do I detract from the transcendency of Jesus the Christ, when I mention 
His Brethren, all Sons of God? I do not, for the Sons of God are not separate and 
apart, set over one against the other; they are all one Sonship of the Father, and 
these apparent differences must be left to those who think themselves wise enough 
to judge between them — instructed enough to know the within of the matter as 
well as the without, which in no case has come down to us in any but the most 
fragmentary and erroneous tradition. I do not know; I dare not judge those who are 
Judges of the quick and dead. And so I leave this audacity to those who would 
forget the logos of their Saviour: “Judge not.” 

If, nevertheless, I am still judged as a “calumniator” by some, it is but natural 
injustice and quite understandable. There is, however, no real Injustice in the 
universe, and he who would be Justified and rise again with Osiris, must balance 
mortal seeming justice and injustice to reach the true equilibrium, and so be free of 
mortal opinion, and stand in the Hall of Truth. It is to the bar of this Judgment 
Hall that all men in the last resort appeal, whether they be born Christian or 
Mahommedan, Brahman or Jew, Buddhist or Taoist, Zoroastrian or Pagan — or 
whether they be born to a manner of faith that is none of these, or to an ideal of 
faith that includes them all. 

Christianity is the Faith of the Western World — the Faith most suited to it in 
nature and in form. He who gave that Faith, gave in fullest abundance through 
many sources; and the greatest sign of His authority, of His authentia , was the 
throwing open of some part of the age-long secret mystery-teaching to the many 
without distinction of age, sex, class, caste, colour, or nation, or of instruction. The 
inner doors of the Temple were thrown wide open to the Amme-ha-aret ^ but the 
innermost door still remained closed, for it is a door that is not man-made — it 
opens into the within of things, and not into some inner court of formal 
instruction. That door still remained naturally closed to the unworthy and 
unknowing; but no Scribe or Pharisee of the established order of things could any 
longer keep the key thereof in Inis selfish hands. The key was given to all, but given 
still mystically, for it is hidden in the inner nature of each son of man, and if he 
seek not in himself, searching into the depths of his own nature, he will never find 
it. That key is the opener of the Gate of the Gnosis, the complement and syzygy 
and spouse of Faith; the virile husband of the woman-side of the Christ-Religion. 


- 179 - 



In the early days that Gnosis was given in greatest fullness; Faith there was, Faith in 
mighty abundance, but there was also Gnosis; and it was because of this Gnosis of 
not a few that the Faith of the many was so intense. But over these mysterious 
days, and the inner in-working of the Mystery, a veil has been drawn to hide the 
holy operations from profane eyes so that to-day, these many centuries after, the 
foolish of the Faith deny there was ever a Gnosis; just as their still more foolish 
predecessors persecuted the Gnostics of Christ and howled them down as 
Antichrists and First-born Sons of Satan. The natural veil was thus drawn over the 
too bright light of the Sacred Marriage when Heaven had kissed the Earth once 
more. 

So great, then, is my faith in the authentia of the Master, so great my assurance of 
the wisdom of His Gnosis. If this be thought “calumny” of His transcendency, 
then we are judged “calumniators” widi Hermes, a Knower of the Mystery, and so 
complimented immeasurably beyond our deserts. 

CONCERNING DATES 

And now let us turn to the Religion of the Mind, which is also the Religion of the 
Heart — for is not Thoth Lord of the heart of man? 

In the first place we have endeavoured faithfully to investigate every statement or 
suggestion that can be thought to be indicative of date, and we have not succeeded 
in any single instance in fixing a precise date for any sermon or fragment. What, 
however, we have been able to do, is to clear the ground of many false opinions, 
and to show the insecurity, if not the absurdity, of any attempt at precision. Every 
hypothesis of precision of date, when that hypothesis has favoured a late date for 
any sermon, has broken down. Whenever there has been a clearer indication, as, for 
instance, in the case of the Shepherd of Hennas, and the Pamandres of Hermes, it has 
thrown the time-period backwards and not forwards. 

What has been proved, and amply proved, however, is that our literature goes back 
in an unbroken tradition of type and form and content to the earliest Ptolemaic 
times. The earliest forms of this literature are lost, but clear records of its nature 
remain. Of the extant literature there are specimens of varying date, though how 
they should be ordered is by no means clear; what, however, is clear is that some of 
our documents are at least contemporaneous with the earliest writings of 
Christianity. 

In the “Prolegomena” we have established an unbroken line of tradition in which 
Gnosis and Mystery-teaching have been handed down through pre-Christian, 
Pagan and Jewish, and through Christian hands. We have further shown that the 
Gnosis of our Trismegistic documents is a simpler form than that of the great 
doctors of the Christianised Gnosis, Basilides and Valentinus, who flourished in the 
first quarter of the second century. The earlier of our sermons, therefore, represent 
one of die main streams, perhaps the main stream, of the Unchristianised Gnosis. 
We have further shown that, together with many other schools, both our 


- 180 - 



Pcemandrists and die writers of the New Testament documents use a common 
theological or theosophical nomenclature, and have a common body of ideas. 

What is clear from all this is that there is no plagiarism, no deliberate copying, no 
logoklopia of other men’s secrets, though there was the freest drawing on a common 
fund. The condition of affairs and the nature of the problems involved are such, 
that any theory of plagiarism at once becomes a two-edged sword; he who says that 
Trismegisticism copied from Christianity, can at once have his argument reversed 
into the form that Christianity copied from Trismegisticism. 

As to date, then, we are dealing with a period when there was as yet no 
divorcement between Gnosis and Faith even in Christianity itself, and therefore the 
canons of judgment erected in later times by ecclesiastical self-limitation cannot be 
made to apply. 


THE BLEND OF TRADITIONS 

The view of General Christianity, gradually narrowed down by the Church Fathers 
into dogmatic Nicene Christianity, looked to one tradition only as the schoolmaster 
of the Faith — the tradition of Israel as the God-favoured Folk. Nevertheless it was 
the fair Greek tongue and the Greek method of thought that were used in evolving 
this special dispensation into a world-cult for the many. 

The Trismegistic tradition laboured under no such limitation; its sympathies were 
more catholic. It is true that its main source was in Egypt, but it embraced with 
whole-hearted affection the wisdom of Hellas and the genius of Greece which were 
developed under Divine Providence to teach the Western Nations the glory and 
beauty of the mind. At the same time its sympathies were not divorced from the 
tradition of the Hebrews, though it refused to set them apart from the rest of 
humanity, and looked rather to the great river of wisdom in the Books of the 
Ghaldaeans, Persians, Medes, and Parthians, than to the single stream shut off in the 
Books of Israel. The spirit of our Trismegistic writings is the same as that which 
inspired the Pagan and Jewish and Christian Gnostic scribes of the Naassene 
Document, all of whom believed that there was but one Mystery which all the 
mystery-institutions of the world attempted to adumbrate. 

If, then, we were to say for the sake of convenience that our Trismegistic writings 
enshrine the Wisdom of Egypt in Greek tradition, we should not divorce that 
Wisdom from the Wisdom of the Chaldeans and the rest. The Wisdom was one, 
the forms were many; and both Egypt and Chaldea looked back to an Archaic 
Gnosis that was the common mother of their most ancient forms of Mystery- 
teaching. 

And if we say that this Wisdom, has come down to us in Greek tradition, we 
should ever remember that this Graecising or philosophising has to do with the 
form and not with the substance. For whence did Thales and Pythagoras and Plato 
draw the inspiration for their philosophy or love of wisdom; was it not from 
Egypt? At anyrate so say the Greeks themselves without a single dissentient voice. 


- 181 - 



And can we think that the Greeks, who were always so proud of their own 
achievements and boasted their own genius so loudly, would have given the palm 
of wisdom to Egypt had they not been compelled by overwhelming evidence to do 
so? But this does not mean that we are to deprive Hellas of her just laurels. Hellas 
was the mother of philosophy in the sense of systematic thinking and the 
development of the analytic reason. This is her great virtue and honour; 
independent research, and the piercing analysis of the intellect and the beauty of 
clear thinking in excellent expression, were her gifts to the Western world. It was 
she beyond the other nations that created for herself a subtler vehicle of thought 
for the manifestation of the powers of mental analysis. That, however, is not 
necessarily in itself wisdom, but the perfecting of an instrument whereby wisdom, 
if it be attained by other means, may be the more clearly expressed for those in 
whom the analytic faculties are being developed. 

Wisdom transcends this mode of mind; for ratiocination is not ecstasis, the 
practical intelligence is not the contemplative mind. Nor is mind, using it as 
contrasted with the other faculties and energies and powers in man, the only or 
even the highest thing in man. This Secret of the Sphinx Egypt had possessed for 
millennia; so that her priests could say to Solon: “You Greeks are all children” — for 
the intellect in Greece was young, though destined to grow into a giant; whereas 
the hoary Gnosis of the heart of man was prior to the icons, and will continue 
when the aeons shall cease. 

That Gnosis of Man still awaits decipherment in Egypt; it is hidden in her glyphs 
and symbols and holy signs. But that Gnosis will never yield its secret to those who 
persist in interpreting these symbols of the Language of the Gods into their lower 
forms, forms intended for children and not for men. And indeed our Trismegistic 
sermons, if they should teach us nothing else, can at least assure us of this, for their 
writers were still ear to mouth with the Living Voice of that once Great Church of 
Wisdom. Our Poemandrists knew what the mystery-tradition inculcated; they knew, 
for they had been within the holy shrines. 

At anyrate for my part I prefer to believe their view of the matter, than to listen to 
the contemptuous patronage of modern conceit bred of complete ignorance of the 
manifold natures and powers and energies in man. 

OF INITIATION 

Indeed the whole of this theosophy of Egypt, as indeed of the theosophy of all 
climes and times, was intended to lead a man up the stairway of perfectioning, to 
the portals of the first true natural initiation, whereby he becomes superman, or, as 
Hermes would say, at last and in truth “man” and not a “procession of Fate.” 
Beyond that stage are many others too sublime for us in any way to understand; 
and it is just because of their sublimity that we do not understand and so we 
“interpret” things of the height into the lowest notions and opinions of the most 
limited tilings of sense. For beyond the superman stage comes the Christ, and 
then — but who shall speak of that which transcends even perfected master-hood? 


- 182 - 



And by initiation, in this sense, we do not mean probationary forms of drama and 
of instruction, “of things said and done,” but a natural thing and process, all that 
which the Christ of Christendom has laboured to inculcate with so much wisdom 
even in the blurred record that has come down to us. To this initiation a man may 
come without a physical guide or the help of any tradition of formal ceremony. 
Nevertheless, he would indeed be foolish who should say that the greater mystery- 
institutions which have been established by wise teachers and the Providence of 
God, have been or are of no effect. 

On the contrary, the disciple of wisdom will study every record of such institutions 
accessible to him, and ponder on their marvellous multiplicity, and marvel at the 
infinite modes devised to play the pedagogue, that so man may be brought unto his 
God. Nevertheless, if he has not the love and wit to study such things, he should 
not despair, for is he not already in the Outer Court of the Temple, if he would but 
lift up Inis eyes to see the mysteries of the universe that surround him on every side? 

We all are babes in the Womb of the Great Mother; how long we continue as 
babes, as embryos, remains for each of us to decide. For in this Birth the Mother 
alone cannot bear all the pains of labour; we too must help and strive and struggle 
and dare to breathe within her holy Womb, so as to accustom our dead lungs to 
expand, before the Great Birth can be accomplished, and we can at length walk 
forth into the Inner World erect upon our feet and draw in at every pore and in 
every atom its pure air without fear. But this Inner World is no thin shadow of the 
outer world, as it may appear to us in the dark night of our present ignorance; it is 
the Inner Cosmos, not the inner earth. Rapts and visions may let us see some 
mysteries of the inner earth, but not the mysteries of Earth, much less the Divine 
Mysteries of Cosmos. 

Nor is there any need to label these tilings with precise terms, for now even the 
most experienced in such vision can know but in part; whereas then we shall know 
the Fullness, face to face, without a parable. But knowing this, who shall tell the 
Mystery, who can tell the Mystery — for is not the whole of Nature telling us this 
Mystery now at every moment with infinite voices from infinite mouths, and yet we 
hear nothing? For is not the whole creation designed with this one purpose to tell 
every son of man that he is of Light and Life and only happens to be out of them, as 
Hermes says? 


A LAST WORD 

But it is very possible that some who have done me the honour of reading to the 
end, will say: “This man is a dreamer, an ecstatic; we have no use for such in the 
hard world of rigid facts that confront us in our everyday life!” But indeed I have 
little time for dreams and ecstasies in the sense in which my supposed critics would 
use the words, as any one may see who can realise the labour that has been 
expended on these volumes, nine-tenths of which are filled with translations and 
commentaries, criticisms and notes, in which dreams and ecstasies have no part, 
but only strenuous co-labour of mind and soul and body. And that is just the 


- 183 - 



carrying out of what I hold to be the true doctrine of practical mysticism, or if 
objection be taken by the reader to that much ill-used word, of the Great Work of 
life. It is true that it is almost impossible to talk of these high or deep things except 
in language that in every expression and in every word is liable to misconstruction. 
For even when we call them high things, they are not high in space or place, but 
rather in the sense that they are of greater intensity than the shows and appearances 
of opinion that form the surfaces or superficialities of our world of normal 
conditioning. 

Spirit in itself is not superior to mind, or mind to soul, or soul to body; each and all 
must work together according to their proper dignity, nature, and energy, in perfect 
equilibrium in the perfect man. They are not descending degrees of some one 
thing, but are mutually in some mysterious way all aspects of one another. 

For should we regard them as quantitatively distinguished solely, then we should be 
looking at them from the point of view of divided body alone; or should we regard 
them as qualitatively distinguished, then we should be looking at them from the 
point of view of separated soul alone; or should we regard them as logically 
distinguished, then we should be regarding them from the standpoint of the formal 
reason solely; while if we should look at them as wholes monadically and 
synthetically, we should be regarding them from an abstract and not a vital view- 
point. 

Nevertheless they are all each of other, the same in difference and different in the 
same. Their source and middle and their end is Man, and Man alone can reach unto 
the Gnosis of God. 

And therefore we may conclude with the daring counsel given unto Hermes by the 
Mind — a doctrine fit for Men. 

If then, thou dost not make thyself like unto God, thou canst not know 
Him. For like is knowahle to like alone. 

“Make thou thyself to grow to the same stature as the Greatness which 
transcends all measure; leap forth from every Body; transcend all Time; 
become Eternity; and then shalt thou know God. 

“Conceiving nothing is impossible unto thyself think thyself deathless and 
able to know all — all arts, all sciences, the way of every life. 

“Become more lofty than all height, and lower than all depth. Collect into 
thyself all senses of all creatures — of fire and water, dry and moist. Think 
that thou art at the same time in every place — in earth, in sea, in sky; not 
yet begotten, in the womb, young old, and dead, in af ter- death conditions. 

“Hnd if thou knowest all these things at once — times, places, doings, 
qualities, and quantities; thou canst know God. ” 


- 184 - 



This is the Straight Way, the Good’s Own Path, the Ancient Road. 

“If thou hut sett It thy foot thereon, \ twill meet thee everywhere, ' twill 
anywhere be seen, both where and when thou dost expect it not — waking, 
sleeping sailing journeying by night, by day, speaking and saying naught. 

For there is naught that is not image of the Good. ” 

And so for the present writing we bid farewell to Thrice-greatest Hermes and the 
teachings of his Mind, the Shepherd of all men — with heart-felt thanks that by the 
Mercy of God the echo of Inis voice has come to us across the ages and bidden us 
once more remember. 


END OF VOLUME III 



- 185 - 



